# CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 35 for them to find. Such hints can be subtle (a char- acter hears a strange rattle when opening the desk drawer, suggesting the presence of a hidden com- partment in the back or bottom of the drawer) or obvious (clear footprints lead across the room to a blank wall that is actually a secret door). These hints let players discover fun secrets without re- quiring them to spend extensive time searching ev- ery square foot of every room and hallway. # Perception And Encounters If the characters encounter another group of crea- tures and neither side is being stealthy, the two groups automatically notice each other once they are within sight or hearing range of one another. The Audible Distance table can help you determine the hearing range, and the following sections ad- dress visibility. If one group tries to hide from the other, use the rules in the Player's Handbook. Aupis_e DISTANCE Noise Distance Trying to be quiet 2d6 x 5 feet Normal noise level 2d6 x 10 feet Very loud 2d6 x 50 feet Visibility Outdoors. When traveling outdoors, most characters can see about 2 miles in any direction on a clear day, except where obstructions block their view. That range increases to 40 miles if they are atop a mountain or a tall hill or are oth- erwise able to look down on the area from a height. Lightly Obscured conditions reduce visibility: rain reduces maximum visibility to 1 mile, and fog re- duces it to between 100 and 300 feet. Outdoor terrain determines the distance at which characters encounter other creatures. The Travel Terrain table (see "Travel" below) gives suggested encounter distances for different types of terrain. Visibility at Sea. From a ship's crow's nest, a look- out can see things up to 10 miles away, assuming clear skies and a relatively calm sea. Overcast skies reduce that distance by half. Lightly Obscured conditions reduce visibility just as they do on land. Visibility Underwater. Visibility underwater de- pends on water clarity and the available light. Use the Underwater Encounter Distance table to deter- mine the encounter distances underwater. # Underwater Encounter Distance Visibility Encounter Distance Clear water, Bright Light 60 feet Clear water, Dim Light 30 feet Murky water or Darkness 10 feet TRAVEL The rules in the "Exploration" section in the Player's Handbook cover the basics of travel on a scale rang- ing from minutes to days. The tools in this section can add excitement to a longer trek. # Journey Stages It can be helpful to break up a journey into stages, with each stage representing anything from a few hours' journey to ten days or so of travel. A journey might have only a single stage if the trip is a matter of following a clear path to a well-known destina- tion. A journey consisting of three stages makes for a satisfying trek. For example, the characters might travel along a river to the forest's edge (stage 1), fol- low a trail into the heart of the woods (stage 2), and then search the woods for an ancient ruin (stage 3). A long journey might involve even more stages and occupy several game sessions. You decide how to break up the journey, though your decision can be shaped by the characters' plan for navigating the journey. When the characters know the route they must take, the stages of the journey should correspond to the way you might give someone directions, as in the example above. Planning the Stages. You can use the accompany- ing Travel Planner sheet to plan the stages of a jour- ney. (Use multiple copies of the Travel Planner for a journey with more than three stages.) For each stage, note where it starts and ends, the distance covered, and the predominant terrain. Choose or randomly determine the weather on that stage (see "Weather" later in this chapter). Plan one or more challenges for each stage, such as an \<i a # Journeys Without Destinations Sometimes, characters travel without a clear path to follow or a clear destination in mind. In such a case, use the grid of your map (squares or hexes) to define the stages of the journey, however many miles each square or hex might be. (This style of play is sometimes called "hex crawling.") In this kind of wilderness exploration, you can take one of two approaches to travel challenges: Sandbox Approach. Your map of the area deter- mines what characters find when they enter any particular hex on the map. You might have encounters or obstacles in place for every hex, or they could be spread farther apart. Random Approach. Use tables to randomly deter- mine encounters or obstacles in each hex the characters enter. Whichever approach you use, running a journey otherwise works the same as described in the rest of the "Travel" section. ------\<---\<---\<------------------ CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME Co: St ae 2. Pere (, TRAVEL PLANNER DESTINATION: START: END:. DISTANCE: TERRAIN: WEATHER:.\_\_ NARRATIVE NOTES STAGE 2 START: END: DISTANCE: TERRAIN: WEATHER: NARRATIVE NOTES \| STAGE 3 START: END: DISTANCE: TERRAIN: WEATHER: # Narrative Notes O rast days /hrs © NORMAL days/hrs O SLOW days/hrs CHALLENGES Al | ELAPSED TIME (Days/HRs) O FAST days/hrs O NORMAL days/hrs O stow days/hrs CHALLENGES \_ Al ELAPSED TIME (Days/HiRs} \| O FAST days/hrs © NORMAL days/hrs O stow days/hrs CHALLENGES ELAPSED TIME (DayS/HRS) as 38 encounter, an obstacle, a search for something hid- den, or a chance of getting lost, as described under "Journey Stage Challenges." Running the Stages. For each stage of the journey, follow these steps in order: Step 1: Set the Pace. Have the players choose their group's travel pace for the stage: Slow, Normal, or Fast (see "Travel Pace"). Based on the length of the stage (in miles) and the group's pace, determine how long this stage takes to complete. Step 2: Narrate the Travel. Describe what happens as the characters complete this stage of their journey. Introduce and resolve any challenges (see "Journey Stage Challenges"). Step 3: Track Food and Water Consumption. Each creature in the party expends the appropriate amount of food and water for the length of the stage. If the party lacks enough food or water, the characters risk dehydration and malnutrition. Step 4: Track Progress. Track the party's progress at the end of the stage. You might mark their po- sition on a map of the region and note the elapsed time on the Travel Planner. Depending on how you planned the stages, the end of a stage might mean the characters arrive at a landmark, a waystation, or an adventure location, whether or not it's their final destination. WEATHER During each stage of the characters' journey, you can determine what the weather is like by rolling on the Weather table, adjusting for the terrain and season as appropriate. Roll 1d20 three times to determine the temperature, the wind, and the precipitation. Weather has no significant game effect most of the time, but see "Environmental Effects" in # Travel Terrain Terrain Maximum Pace Encounter Distance Arctic Fast\* 6d6 x 10 feet Coastal Normal 2d10 x 10 feet Desert Normal 6d6 x 10 feet Forest Normal 2d8 x 10 feet Grassland Fast 6d6 x 10 feet Hill Normal 2d10 x 10 feet Mountain Slow 4d10 x 10 feet Swamp Slow 2d8 x 10 feet Underdark Normal 2d6 x 10 feet Urban Normal 2d6 x 10 feet Waterborne --- Special! 6d6 x 10 feet chapter 3 for the effects of extreme weather. Adding weather details to your descriptions of the charac- ters' journey can make it more memorable. WEATHER 1d20 Temperature 1-14 Normal for the season 15-17 1d4 x 10 degrees Fahrenheit colder 18-20 1d4 x 10 degrees Fahrenheit hotter 1420 Wind Precipitation 1-12 None None 13-17 Light Light rain or light snowfall 18-20 Strong Heavy rain or heavy snowfall # Travel Pace A group of characters can travel overland at a Nor- mal, Fast, or Slow pace, as described in the Player's Handbook. During any journey stage, the predomi- nant terrain determines the characters' maximum travel pace, as shown in the Maximum Pace column of the Travel Terrain table. Certain factors can af- fect a group's travel pace. Good Roads. The presence of a good road in- creases the group's maximum pace by one step (from Slow to Normal or from Normal to Fast). Slower Travelers. The group must move at a Slow pace if any group member's Speed is reduced to half or less of normal. Extended Travel. Characters can push themselves to travel for more than 8 hours per day, at the risk of tiring. At the end of each additional hour of travel beyond 8 hours, each character must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or gain 1 Exhaustion level. The DC is 10 plus 1 for each hour past 8 hours. Special Movement. If a party can travel at a high Speed for an extended time, as with a spell such as Foraging DC NavigationDC Search DC 20 10 10 10 5 15 20 10 10 10 15 15 15 # 5 15 15 10 15 20 15 20 10 1s 20 20 10 20 20 15 1s 15 10 15 \*Appropriate equipment (such as skis) is necessary to keep up a Fast pace in Arctic terrain. "Characters' rate of travel while waterborne depends on the vehicle carrying them; see"Vehicles." # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME Wind Walk or a magic item such as a Carpet of Flying, translate the party's Speed into travel rates using these rules: Miles per hour = Speed + 10 Miles per day (Normal pace) = Miles per hour x number of hours traveled (typically 8) Fast pace = Miles per day x 11 (round down) Slow pace = Miles per day x 2/3 (round down) If the characters are flying or their special move- ment allows them to ignore Difficult Terrain, they can move at a Fast pace regardless of the terrain. Vehicles. Characters traveling in a vehicle use the vehicle's speed in miles per hour (as shown in chap- ter 6 of the Player's Handbook) to determine their rate of travel, and they don't choose a travel pace. NARRATION DURING TRAVEL Just as movies use travel montages to convey long and arduous journeys in a matter of seconds, you can use a few sentences of descriptive text to paint a picture of a journey in your players' minds before moving on. Describe the journey as vividly as you like, but keep momentum by focusing on the most notable details that reinforce the desired mood. Visual aids can help set the scene for the char- acters' travels. Image searches on the internet can lead you to breathtaking landscapes (in fact, that's a good phrase to search for). You can spice up your # Traveling Through Fantastical Lanoscapes Can Be # A Fun And Interesting Part Of Any Aoventure is descriptions with truly fantastical elements. For example, a forest might be home to tiny dragonets instead of birds, or its trees might be festooned with giant webs or have eerie green, glowing sap. A single fantastic element within an otherwise realistic and memorable landscape is enough. Use the landscape to set the mood and tone for your adventure. In one forest, close-set trees might shroud all light and seem to watch the adventurers as they pass. In another, sunlight streams through the leaves above, and flower-laden vines twine up every trunk. Signs of corruption---rotting wood, foul-smelling water, and rocks covered with slimy moss---can be a signal that the adventurers are drawing close to the site of evil power that is their destination or can provide clues to the nature of the threats to be found there. # Journey Stage Challenges Challenges that adventurers might face during a journey stage include the following, which are dis- cussed in the sections that follow: Encounters with other creatures Foraging Navigation (and becoming lost) Obstacles Searches Tracking # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 39 40 Encounters with Other Creatures. The Encounter Distance column in the Travel Terrain table gives the range at which creatures might become aware of each other while journeying through the wilder- ness. When staging an encounter, consider these possibilities: Ambush. Monsters set up an ambush along a route they expect travelers to follow. Attack from Above. Flying monsters swoop down to attack the characters. Distant Sighting. The characters and monsters spot each other from a distance in open terrain. Found by Chance. The characters happen upon monsters that are camping, eating, hunting, bask- ing in the sun, walking along the same trail, or engaged in some other activity. Pursuit. The characters are tracking monsters, or the monsters are tracking them. The encounter begins when the two groups get close enough to interact. Foraging. Characters without water and Rations can stave off dehydration and malnutrition by gathering food and water as they travel. A foraging character makes a Wisdom (Survival) check once per journey stage (or once per day if a stage is shorter than a day). The DC is determined by the abundance of food and water in the region, as shown in the Foraging DC column of the Travel Terrain table. If multiple characters forage, each character makes a separate check. A foraging character finds nothing on a failed check. On a successful check, roll 1d6 and add the character's Wisdom modifier to determine how much food (in pounds) the character finds per day of the journey stage, then repeat the roll for water (in gallons). Navigation. If the characters aren't following an established path or traveling with a landmark in sight, they risk getting lost. Here are some circum- stances that can cause a group to lose its way: - Branching passages underground - Horizon-obscuring terrain, such as dense forest - Obscuring weather, such as heavy rain or fog - Traveling at night: Traveling at sea while unable to see the sky or any familiar land Let the players know when the characters are at risk of getting lost, then have the characters choose one of their number to make a Wisdom (Survival) check against a DC appropriate to the terrain, as shown in the Navigation DC column of the Travel Terrain table. Another member of the group can take the Help action to assist this check as normal. If the check fails, the party goes off course. You decide what this looks like: they might follow the # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME wrong branch of a river, orient themselves to the wrong mountain peak on the horizon, or get turned around in the forest. As a baseline, assume that get- ting lost extends the length of the current journey stage by 1d6 « 10 percent. It might also affect subse- quent stages of the journey. Obstacles. An obstacle is terrain or weather that obstructs the characters' path. Examples include a cliff, a blizzard, or a forest fire. To get past the obstacle, characters might need to backtrack and find an alternate route, or they might need to take shelter until the obstacle goes away. Let the players spend time thinking about a solution, then be gener- ous in adjudicating whether their plan works. In addition to the chance of a delay (adding a few hours, a day, or a couple of days to the current stage of the journey), here are some other consequences you can impose if characters fail to overcome or bypass an obstacle: Combat Encounter. The characters encounter one or more Hostile creatures. For example, march- ing through a burning forest instead of circling around it might prompt an encounter with raging fire elementals. Damage. The characters take damage. For example, a character who tumbles over a waterfall might take Bludgeoning damage. See "Improvising Damage" in this chapter for guidelines on determining how much damage is appropriate. Exhaustion, The obstacle fatigues the characters, causing them to gain Exhaustion levels. For at Do PLayers NEED TO TRACK RATIONS? You might decide that tracking Rations is unnec- essary in your game. Even if the characters are in a desert, you can assume that a character with proficiency in the Survival skill can find enough food and water to sustain the party. Make sure you work that into your narration of the journey so the player feels good about choosing that skill proficiency. You can also assume the characters can load their mounts with enough Rations for their journey, or they can use magic (such as the Create Food and Water spell) to sustain them. On the other hand, having players track Rations seems appropriate for a more realistic campaign. Characters in such a campaign should approach a long wilderness journey as a challenge in lo- gistics: how many pack animals do they need to carry the food for the journey, and how do they feed the animals? As always, communicate your expectations about these rules to the players ahead of time. If you don't plan on tracking Rations, tell your play- ers that before they spend an hour purchasing supplies for their journey. eee eee example, marching through a blizzard instead of taking shelter might cause each character to gain 1d4 Exhaustion levels. Another Condition. The obstacle imposes another condition on the characters. For example, wad- ing through a fetid swamp rather than skirting around it might impose the Poisoned condition, which lasts until removed by magic. Searches. This challenge often comes up in the last stage of a journey: the characters have to find their destination, which might be an island, an old mine, an ancient ruin, a magical pool, a hag's cottage, or some other feature. The Search DC column of the Travel Terrain table suggests DCs for Wisdom (Perception) checks made to find something in different types of terrain. You can adjust these DCs based on the specific terrain features and the nature of what the characters are trying to find, using the guidelines for setting DCs earlier in this chapter. Tracking. A specific instance of searching on a journey is when adventurers choose their path by following the tracks of other creatures. To track, one or more trackers must succeed on a Wis- dom (Survival) check. You might require track- ers to make a new check in any of the following circumstances: Resting. The trackers resume tracking after finish- ing a Short or Long Rest. Shifting Weather or Terrain. The weather or ter- rain changes in a way that makes tracking harder. Terrain Obstacle. The trail crosses a river or simi- lar obstacle that allows no tracks. The DC for the check depends on how well the ground shows signs of a creature's passage. No roll is necessary in situations where the tracks are obvi- ous, such as following an army along a muddy road. Spotting tracks on bare rock is more challenging unless the creature being tracked leaves a distinct trail. Additionally, the passage of time often makes tracks harder to follow. In a situation where there is no trail to follow, you can rule that tracking is impossible. Use the Search DC column of the Travel Terrain table as a starting point for setting the DC for tracking. If you prefer, you can choose a DC based on your assessment of the difficulty---higher if days have elapsed since the creature passed, lower if the creature is leaving an obvious trail such as blood. You can also grant Advantage on the check if there's more than one set of tracks to follow or Dis- advantage if the trail passes through a busy area. On a failed check, the character loses the trail but can attempt to find it again by carefully search- ing the area. It takes 10 minutes to find a trail in a confined area, such as a series of caverns, or 1 hour outdoors. 3: ' # Running Combat This section builds on the combat rules in the Play- er's Handbook and offers tips for keeping the game running smoothly when a fight breaks out. # Rolling Initiative Combat starts when---and only when---you say it does. Some characters have abilities that trigger on an Initiative roll; you, not the players, decide if and when Initiative is rolled, A high-level Barbarian can't just punch their Paladin friend and roll Initia- tive to regain expended uses of Rage. In any situation where a character's actions ini- tiate combat, you can give the acting character Advantage on their Initiative roll. For example, if a conversation with an NPC is cut short because the Sorcerer is convinced that NPC is a doppelganger and targets it with a Chromatic Orb spell, everyone rolls Initiative, and the Sorcerer does so with Advantage. If the doppelganger rolls well, it might still act before the Sorcerer's spell goes off, reflecting the monster's ability to anticipate the spell. UsING INITIATIVE SCORES You can get to the action of combat more quickly by using Initiative scores instead of rolling. You might use Initiative scores just for characters, just for monsters, or for both. Initiative Scores for Characters. A character's Ini- tiative score is typically 10 plus all modifiers to the character's Initiative roll (including their Dexterity modifier and any special modifiers). If you want your players to use Initiative scores, have them record those scores on their character sheets, and keep your own list of those scores. Initiative Scores for Monsters. A monster's stat block in the Monster Manual includes its Initiative score after its Initiative bonus. Advantage and Disadvantage. If a creature has Advantage on Initiative rolls, increase its Initiative score by 5. If it has Disadvantage on those rolls, de- crease that score by 5. # Tracking Initiative The following sections describe different methods for keeping track of who goes when in combat. HIDDEN LIsT You can track Initiative on a list your players can't see using any of the following tools: - Paper or a notebook behind the DM screen » Aspreadsheet or document on a laptop or tablet - An app on your tablet or phone - Index cards for each character and each group of identical monsters, placed in Initiative order in a stack you cycle through # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME To ee A hidden list allows you to track combatants who haven't been revealed yet, and you can use the list as a place to record the current Hit Points of monsters, as well as other useful notes. If you use this approach, you tell the players when it's their characters' turn. When you call out the character whose turn is starting, consider also mentioning who's next, prompting that character's player to think ahead. OPEN LIsT You can track Initiative on a list that is visible to the players using any of the following tools: - Awhiteboard on a wall or propped up nearby - A battle mat you use for miniatures - Folded index cards for each character and each group of identical monsters, placed like tents in Initiative order across the top of your DM screen - Avirtual tabletop program you're using or a group text chat - Magnets, clothespins, or an accessory designed to represent the Initiative order spatially An open list makes everyone aware of the order of play. Players know when their characters' turns are coming up so they can plan their actions in advance. An open list also lets the players know when the monsters act in the fight, although you can hold off on adding monsters to the list until they take their first turns. # Tracking Monsters' Hit Points During a combat encounter, you or a player should track how much damage each monster takes. Most DMs track damage in secret so their players don't know how many Hit Points a monster has remaining. It helps to have a system to track damage for groups of monsters. If you aren't using miniatures or other visual aids, one way to track your monsters is to assign them unique features. For example, imagine that you're running an encounter with three ogres. You might attach descriptions such as "the ogre with a big scar" and "the ogre with the helmet" to help you and your players track which monster is which. Once Initiative is rolled, jot down each ogre's Hit Points and add notes (and even a name, if you like) to differentiate each one: king logre w/. seat): 68 Thod lagre w/ helm): 71 Mur (ogre smeared. n/, ditt): 59 If you use miniatures to represent monsters, one way to differentiate them is to give each one a unique miniature. If you use identical miniatures to represent multiple monsters, you can tag the miniatures with small stickers of different colors or stickers with different letters or numbers on them. For example, in a combat encounter with three ogres, you could use three identical ogre miniatures tagged with stickers marked A, B, and C, respec- tively. To track the ogres' Hit Points, you can sort them by letter, then subtract damage from their Hit Points as they take it. Your records might look something like this after a few rounds of combat: Ogre 1h: 08 59 53 45 244-9 dead Oyre B: Wh G2 S4 33 Opre C: 59 Some DMs prefer to track how much damage a monster has taken, adding to that number as char- acters deal damage (instead of subtracting from the monster's Hit Points). Adding is generally easier than subtracting, and you can track damage on a visible list of Initiative (such as a whiteboard) without revealing to the players how many Hit Points the monsters have. The tracking might look like this: Ogre Ah: 918 23 V4 54-59 dead Ogre B: 947 38 Oyre é: # Three Ogres Block A Narrow Mountain Pass # Using And Tracking Conditions Many rules and features in the game apply condi- tions to creatures. You can also apply conditions on the fly when it makes sense to do so. For example, the Poisoned condition can reflect a variety of im- pairments, from influenza to intoxication. You can track monsters' conditions wherever you track their Hit Points. Players should track any conditions affecting their characters. Character conditions can also be marked on index cards or a whiteboard. You might also mark index cards or sticky notes with conditions and their effects or use tokens or some other tangible reminder. Then hand the cards, notes, or tokens to players when their characters have a condition. Putting a sticky note with a con- dition's rules on a player's character sheet can help that player remember the effects of the condition. You can also place tokens or colored plastic rings (the rings from soda bottle caps work well) ona creature's miniature, helping everyone remember which creatures are affected by conditions. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 43 ome \<s-oe MINIATURES Often, players can rely on your descriptions to imagine where their characters are in relation to their surroundings and their enemies. Certain com- bat encounters, however, can benefit from having visual aids or physical props, the most common of which are miniatures and a battle grid. Minia- tures are typically used in conjunction with model terrain, modular dungeon tiles, or maps drawn on large vinyl mats. Most virtual tabletops for on- line play simulate miniatures and grids in a digital environment. The following sections expand on the rules in the Player's Handbook for depicting combat using minia- ture figures on a grid. # Tactical Maps You can draw tactical maps with colored markers on an erasable vinyl mat with l-inch squares or a similar flat surface. Preprinted poster-sized maps, maps assembled from cardboard tiles, and terrain made of sculpted plaster or resin are other options. If you're playing on a virtual tabletop, you can find abundant tactical maps in digital form online. The most common unit for tactical maps is the 5-foot square, and maps with grids are readily avail- able and easy to create. However, you don't have to use a grid at all. You can track distances with a tape measure, string, rulers, or pipe cleaners cut to specific lengths. Another option is a play surface covered by 1-inch hexagons (often called hexes), which makes movement more flexible while keeping the easy counting of a grid. Dungeon corridors with straight walls and right angles don't map easily onto hexes, though. # Creature Size On Squares And Hexes Tiny Smaut on Medium Largce # Creature Size And Space Acreature's size determines how much space it occupies on squares or hexes, as shown in the Creature Size and Space table and the accompanying diagrams. If the miniature you use for a monster takes up an amount of space different from what's in the table, that's fine, but treat the monster as its official size for all rules. For example, you might use a miniature that has a Large base to represent a Huge giant. That giant takes up less space on the battlefield than its size suggests, but it is still Huge for the purposes of rules like grappling. # Creature Size And Space Size Space in Squares Space in Hexes Tiny 4 per square 4 per hex Small 1 square 1 hex Medium 1 square 1 hex Large 4 squares (2by2) 3 hexes Huge 9 squares (3 by3) 7 hexes Gargantuan 16 squares (4by4) 12 hexes or or more more # Areas Of Effect An area of effect must be translated onto squares or hexes to determine which potential targets are in the area. If the area has a point of origin, choose an intersection of squares or hexes to be the point of origin, then follow its rules as normal. If an area of effect covers at least half a square or hex, the entire square or hex is affected. Huse GARGANTUAN Harr Cover COVER ON SQUARES AND HEXxes # Line Of Sight To determine whether there is line of sight between two spaces, pick a corner of one space and trace an imaginary line from that corner to any part of another space. If you can trace a line that doesn't pass through or touch an object or effect that blocks vision---such as a stone wall, a thick curtain, or a dense cloud of fog---then there is line of sight. COVER The accompanying diagrams illustrate cover on squares or hexes. To determine whether a target has cover against an attack or other effect, choose a corner of the attacker's space or the point of ori- gin of an area of effect. Then trace imaginary lines from that corner to every corner of any one square the target occupies. If one or two of those lines are blocked by an obstacle (including a creature), the target has Half Cover. If three or four of those lines are blocked but the attack or effect can still reach the target (such as when the target is behind an ar- row slit), the target has Three-Quarters Cover. On hexes, use the same procedure as above, draw- ing lines between the corners of the hexagons. The target has Half Cover if one, two, or three lines are blocked by an obstacle, and Three-Quarters Cover if four or more lines are blocked but the attack or effect can still reach the target. # Diagonal Movement The Player's Handbook presents a simple method for counting movement and measuring range on a grid of squares: count every square as 5 feet, even if the creature is moving or counting diagonally. While fast in play, this rule breaks the laws of geometry. Twree-Quarters Cover \] If you want more accuracy, use the following rule: the first diagonal square counts as 5 feet, but the second diagonal square counts as 10 feet. This pat- tern of 5 feet and then 10 feet continues whenever you're counting diagonally, even if the creature moves straight between different bits of diagonal movement. For example, a character might move 1 square diagonally (5 feet), then 3 squares straight (15 feet), and then another square diagonally (10 feet) for a total movement of 30 feet. # Tracking Position At Long Range If combat erupts between two groups that are hun- dreds of feet away from each other, try the follow- ing techniques to keep track of who's where: Note Paper. List all combatants on a piece of pa- per, and keep a running tally of each creature's distance from the party's starting point (the party starts at O feet), As the characters advance, increase their numbers; as the monsters advance toward the characters, decrease their numbers. Adjust the Grid Scale. If you're using a battle grid, take a section of that grid and use it to track posi- tion, changing the scale so that each square is 30 feet. You don't need to be precise about creatures' positions, just their distance from each other. Dice as Range Counters. Do away with the grid and put miniatures in their relative positions, us- ing dice next to each miniature to show how far they've traveled. You can use percentile dice (or three d10s, with each die representing a digit in a three-digit number, if the encounter begins at a range between 100 and 1,000 feet), or use one or more d20s to show how many 5-foot or 10-foot squares the creature has advanced. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 45 EE ee ire ecee \| at i\] 46 # Narration In Combat Although it's important that the players understand what's going on in terms of the rules, the game can get dull if everyone uses only "gamespeak": "That's an 18 to hit," "You hit; now roll damage," "11 points," and "OK, now we're to Initiative count 153." Instead, use the rules and your knowledge of the scene to help your narration. If 18 is barely a hit, but the 11 points of damage is a bad wound for the enemy, say: "You swing wildly, and the knight brings his shield up just a second too late. Your blade catches him along the jaw, drawing a deep gash. He recoils, bleeding badly!" As the characters fight monsters, you can reveal information to help the players make good choices, as described in the sections that follow. Loss OF HIT POINTS You can give players a sense of how well they're doing against a creature by describing, in narrative terms, how hurt the creature is. For example, if the creature is Bloodied, you might say the creature has visible wounds and appears beaten down. Such in- formation gives the players a sense of progress and might spur them to press the attack. On the other hand, if the characters aren't damaging the creature much, let the players know the creature doesn't look hurt. That might encourage the players to change their plan. ABILITIES, STRENGTHS, AND WEAKNESSES Share information with the players about the char- acteristics of creatures they fight as those characteristics become apparent. For example, if a Wizard casts Fire Bolt against a Fire Elemental (a creature that has Immunity to Fire damage), let the players know the spell doesn't seem to bother the creature at all. Players might correctly guess that a creature made of fire probably wouldn't harmed by Fire Bolt; feel free to confirm their guesses. # Actions In Combat When a monster takes an action in combat, the players need to have some idea what's going on both in the fictional reality of the game and in terms of the rules of the game. This means that when an enemy with a Crossbow takes the Ready action to cover the area in front of a door, the players should have a pretty good idea that if their characters move in front of that door, the enemy will shoot them. A monster's description in the Monster Manual often explains what's happening in the world while the monster is using its special actions. The Describ- ing Actions table has descriptions you can use to explain what's going on when a creature takes one of the common actions available to all creatures. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME DescriBiING ACTIONS Action Description Dash "Dispensing with attacks, your foe hur- ries across the room." Disengage "Careful not to drop its guard, your foe edges away from you." Dodge "Your foe watches you closely and tries to parry your attacks." Help "While its ally attacks, your foe darts around, causing a distraction." Magic "Your foe gestures in a deliberate man- ner and utters an invocation." Ready "Your foe seems to be waiting for something, ready to act." You can combine those narrative descriptions with game rules: "Dispensing with attacks, your foe hur- ries across the room, taking the Dash action." # Monsters Casting Spells It's important that players can tell when their characters' opponents are casting spells, giving the characters the opportunity to cast Counterspell or otherwise interfere with the spellcasting. When a monster casts a spell, check the compo- nents it's using and describe its activity appropri- ately. If the spell has Verbal components, the mon- ster might chant, boldly proclaim, or hiss the mystic syllables of the spell. Somatic components involve the monster moving its hands (or similar append- ages) in graceful patterns, shaping them into angu- lar positions, or thrusting them sharply forward. Finally, the monster might be holding a Spellcasting Focus or some other Material component. A. \_ # Awarding Heroic Inspiration As discussed in the Player's Handbook, Heroic Inspiration is a reward you can give to characters when their players make the game more fun, ex- citing, and memorable for everyone at the table. Any player who makes the whole table erupt in laughter, cheers, or howls of surprise probably deserves Heroic Inspiration. You can also use Heroic Inspiration to reward roleplaying, immersion in the game, and heroism. Use it to incentivize the kind of behavior you want to see in your game, such as acting in character, taking risks, thinking strategically, cooperating well, or embracing the tropes of a particular genre. Make sure your use of Heroic Inspiration is aligned with the expectations you set out at the start of your game (see "Ensuring Fun for All" in chapter 1). ------ --- --- ---\_------ ---\<---\<--- Some monsters have the special ability to ignore some or all of a spell's normal components, which might prevent characters from recognizing what the monster is doing. Similarly, when monsters use magical abilities that don't involve casting spells, make sure it's clear to the players that the monster is drawing on its unique magical abilities, not cast- ing a spell their characters could counter. # Keeping Combat Moving Sometimes even the best-planned combat encoun- ter can turn into a slog, where no one's moving and neither side is hitting or dealing much damage to the other. When that happens, here are a few tech- niques you can use to get things moving again or bring the encounter to a speedy close. # Don't Repeat Game States When characters do something to change the tacti- cal situation, don't respond by putting things back to the way they were before. For example, if a char- acter takes the Disengage action to move away from a group of monsters, don't respond by having those same monsters chase the character. Move the mon- sters somewhere else. Wi, wr # A Oragon's Arrival Makes A Simple Fight Against # Lombies Much More Interesting - = - a # Hasten A Monster's Demise If a combat has gone on long enough and the char- acters' victory is almost certain, you can simply have the monster drop dead. The players don't ever need to know that it still had 15 Hit Points left after the characters' last attack. # End Hostilities Most monsters can see when a fight's not going their way (or not going anywhere at all). A sapient monster might parley with the characters in an effort to get out of the situation alive. Suddenly a combat encounter turns into a social interaction as the monster and characters negotiate an end to their hostilities. A nonsapient monster might play dead to try to get the characters to stop attacking it, only to get up and run away as soon as it has the opportunity. See "Fight or Flight" later in this chapter for more suggestions. App A COMBATANT To add excitement to a battle, consider adding a combatant. Maybe a monstrous predator wanders onto the scene where the characters are locked in battle with another foe. Or maybe the noise of the ongoing combat attracts the attention of nearby # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 47 dungeon denizens. The new combatant might at- tack both the characters and their foes, or it might join one side or the other, Each time one or more new combatants join the encounter, roll Initiative for them and weave them into the Initiative order. # Change The Terrain Consider changing a battle's terrain to introduce a new element and give combatants reasons to move around. Perhaps a powerful attack or an explosive spell topples a column, shatters a wall, or breaks up the floor. Maybe a fissure opens in the floor, releas- ing noxious vapors, obscuring smoke, or lava. Magic could tear open the boundaries between planes of existence, unleashing raw elements or other planar energy. Or perhaps a monster's desperation causes wild magic to warp the fabric of reality. You can use the environmental effects, hazards, and traps in chapter 3 to represent these effects.