# CHAPTER \| TREASURE Boox or Vice DarKness d Action. While present, the halo gives you Advan- tage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks. In addition, Fiends and Undead within the halo's Bright Light make attack rolls against you with Disadvantage. Random Properties. The Book of Exalted Deeds has the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - 2 minor beneficial properties: 2 major beneficial properties Destroying the Book. The Book of Exalted Deeds can't be destroyed. However, drowning the book in the River Styx removes all writing and imagery from its pages and renders the book powerless for 1d100 years. BOOK OF VILE DARKNESS Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement) The contents of this foul manuscript are the meat and drink of the wicked. It contains knowledge so horrid that to even glimpse the scrawled pages in- vites doom. Most believe the lich-god Vecna authored the Book of Vile Darkness. He recorded in its pages every horrid idea, every corrupt thought, and every exam- ple of foul magic he came across or devised. Other practitioners of evil have added their own input to the book's catalog of vile knowledge. Their additions are clear, for the writers of later works stitched whatever they were writing into the tome or, in some cases, made notations and additions to existing text. There are places where pages are missing, torn, or covered so completely with ink, blood, and scratches that the original text can't be divined. Nature can't abide the book's presence. Ordinary plants wither in its presence, common animals are unwilling to approach it, and the book gradually destroys whatever it touches. Even stone cracks and turns to powder if the book rests on it long enough. Whenever a creature that isn't a Fiend or an Undead attunes to the Book of Vile Darkness, that creature makes a DC 17 Charisma saving throw. On a failed save, the creature is magically transformed into a Larva under the DM's control. Only a Wish spell can reverse this vile transformation. A creature attuned to the book must spend 80 hours reading and studying it to digest its contents and use its Adjusted Ability Scores, Tireless Form, Spells, Vile Lore, and Vile Speech properties. The Book of Vile Darkness remains with you only as long as you strive to work evil in the world. If you fail to perform at least one evil act within the span of 10 days, or if you willingly perform a good act, the book disappears, your Attunement to it ends im- mediately, and you lose all benefits granted by it. If you die while attuned to the book, an entity of great evil claims your soul. You can't be restored to life by any means while your soul remains imprisoned. Adjusted Ability Scores. One ability score of your choice increases by 2, to a maximum of 24. Another ability score of your choice decreases by 2, to a min- imum of 3. The book can't adjust your ability scores again. Tireless Form. While the book is on your person, you have Immunity to the Exhaustion condition. Random Properties. The Book of Vile Darkness has the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - 3 minor beneficial properties - 1 major beneficial property - 3 minor detrimental properties - 2 major detrimental properties Spells. While holding the book and holding it, you can cast the following spells (save DC 18) from it: - Animate Dead - Circle of Death - Dominate Monster - Finger of Death Once you use the book to cast a spell, you can't cast that spell again from it until the next dawn. Vile Lore. You can reference the Book of Vile Dark- ness whenever you make an Intelligence check to recall information about some aspect of evil, such as lore about demons. When you do so, you have Ad- vantage on that check. At the DM's discretion, the book might reveal secrets no mortal should know, such as the true names of powerful Fiends, foul rites that allow one to transform into a death knight or lich, or long-lost spells crafted by beings so evil their names ought never to be spoken aloud. Vile Speech. While the book is on your person, you can take a Magic action to recite words from its pages in a foul, dead language. Each time you do so, you take 1d12 Psychic damage, and each creature within 15 feet of you takes 3d6 Psychic damage un- less the creature is a Fiend or an Undead. Destroying the Book. The Book of Vile Darkness allows pages to be torn from it, but any evil lore contained on those pages finds its way back into the book eventually, usually when a new author adds pages to the tome. If a solar tears the book in two, the book is de- stroyed for 1d100 years, after which it re-forms in some far corner of the multiverse. A creature attuned to the book for 100 years can unearth a phrase hidden in the original text that, when translated to Celestial and spoken aloud, de- stroys both the speaker and the book in a flash of radiance. However, as long as evil exists in the mul- tiverse, the book re-forms 1d10 = 100 years later. Boots OF ELVENKIND Wondrous Item, Uncommon While you wear these boots, your steps make no sound, regardless of the surface you are moving across. You also have Advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. Boots OF FALSE TRACKS Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement) While wearing these boots, you can have them leave tracks like those of any kind of Humanoid of your size. Boots OF LEVITATION Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While you wear these boots, you can cast Levitate on yourself. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 239 und 24.0 Boors or Sreeo Boors or ELvenxiIno Boots OF SPEED Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While you wear these boots, you can take a Bonus Action to click the boots' heels together. If you do, the boots double your Speed, and any creature that makes an Opportunity Attack against you has Dis- advantage on the attack roll. If you click your heels together again, you end the effect. When you've used the boots' property for a total of 10 minutes, the magic ceases to function for you until you finish a Long Rest. BOOTS OF STRIDING AND SPRINGING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While you wear these boots, your Speed becomes 30 feet unless your Speed is higher, and your Speed isn't reduced by you carrying weight in excess of your carrying capacity or wearing Heavy Armor. Once on each of your turns, you can jump up to 30 feet by spending only 10 feet of movement. BOOTS OF THE WINTERLANDS Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) These furred boots are snug and feel warm. While wearing them, you gain the following benefits. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Boors oF Srrioine ANO SPRINGING Bow. of CommanoinG Warer ELemenrats Boors or rne WINTERLANDS Cold Resistance. You have Resistance to Cold damage and can tolerate temperatures of O degrees Fahrenheit or lower without any additional protection. Winter Strider. You ignore Difficult Terrain cre- ated by ice or snow. BOwL OF COMMANDING WATER ELEMENTALS Wondrous Item, Rare While this bowl is filled with water and you are within 5 feet of it, you can take a Magic action to summon a Water Elemental, The elemental ap- pears in an unoccupied space as close to the bowl as possible, understands your languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears after 1 hour, when it dies, or when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The bow! can't be used this way again until the next dawn. The bowl is about 1 foot in diameter and half as deep. It holds about 3 gallons. BRACERS OF ARCHERY Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing these bracers, you have proficiency with the Longbow and Shortbow, and you gain a +2 bonus to damage rolls made with such weapons. Broocn or SHIELOING Bracers or ARCHERY BRACERS OF DEFENSE Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing these bracers, you gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class if you are wearing no armor and using no Shield. # Brazier Of Commanding Fire Elementals Wondrous Item, Rare While you are within 5 feet of this brazier, you can take a Magic action to summon a Fire Elemental. The elemental appears in an unoccupied space as close to the brazier as possible, understands your languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears after 1 hour, when it dies, or when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The brazier can't be used this way again until the next dawn. BROOCH OF SHIELDING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this brooch, you have Resistance to Force damage, and you have Immunity to damage from the Magic Missile spell. Bracers or Derense Broom or Fivine Brazier oF COMMANDING Fire ELEMENTALS BROOM OF FLYING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) This wooden broom functions like a mundane broom until you stand astride it and take a Magic action to make it hover beneath you, at which time it can be ridden in the air. It has a Fly Speed of 50 feet. It can carry up to 400 pounds, but its Fly Speed becomes 30 feet while carrying over 200 pounds. The broom stops hovering when you land or when you're no longer riding it. As a Magic action, you can send the broom to travel alone to a destination within 1 mile of you if you name the location and are familiar with it. The broom comes back to you when you take a Magic action and use a command word if the broom is still within 1 mile of you. CANDLE OF INVOCATION Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This candle's magic is activated when the candle is lit, which requires a Magic action. After burning for 4 hours, the candle is destroyed. You can snuff it out early for use at a later time. Deduct the time it burned in increments of 1 minute from its total burn time. While lit, the candle sheds Dim Light in a 30-foot radius. While you are within that light, you have Advantage on D20 Tests. In addition, a Cleric or Druid in the light can cast level 1 spells they have prepared without expending spell slots. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 241 Alternatively, when you light the candle for the first time, you can cast Gate with it. Doing so de- stroys the candle. The portal created by the spell links to a particular Outer Plane chosen by the DM or determined by rolling on the following table. 1d100 Outer Plane 14100 Outer Plane 01-05 Abyss 55-59 Gehenna 06-10 Acheron 60-64 Hades 11-17. Arborea 65-69 Limbo 18-25 Arcadia 70-77 Mechanus 26-33 Beastlands 78-85 Mount Celestia 34-41 Bytopia 86-90 Nine Hells 42-46 Carceri 91-95 Pandemonium 47-54 Elysium 96-00 Ysgard CANDLE OF THE DEEP Wondrous Item, Common The flame of this candle isn't extinguished when immersed in water. It gives off light and heat like a normal candle. CAPE OF THE MOUNTEBANK Wondrous Item, Rare This cape smells faintly of brimstone. While wear- ing it, you can use it to cast Dimension Door as a Canoce or INVOCATION # CHAPTER \| TREASURE L, CAPE OF THE Mounresank Magic action. This property can't be used again until the next dawn. When you teleport with that spell, you leave be- hind a cloud of smoke. The space you left is Lightly Obscured by that smoke until the end of your next turn. Cap OF WATER BREATHING Wondrous Item, Uncommon While wearing this cap underwater, you can take a Magic action to create a bubble of air around your head. This bubble allows you to breathe normally underwater. This bubble stays with you until the cap is removed or you are no longer underwater. CARPET OF FLYING Wondrous Item, Very Rare You can make this carpet hover and fly by taking a Magic action and using the carpet's command word. It moves according to your directions if you are within 30 feet of it. Four sizes of Carpet of Flying exist. The DM chooses the size of a given carpet or determines it randomly by rolling on the following table. A car- pet can carry up to twice the weight shown on the table, but its Fly Speed is halved if it carries more than its normal capacity. Carrer oF Fivins 1d100 Size Capacity Fly Speed 01-20 3ft.xSft. 200`\b.`{=tex} 80 feet 21-55 4 ft. x 6 ft. 400 Ib. 60 feet 56-80 5ft.x7ft. 600`\b.`{=tex} 40 feet 81-00 6ft.x9 ft. 800 Ib. 30 feet CastT-OFF ARMOR Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Common You can doff this armor as a Magic action. # Cauldron Of Rebirth Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Druid or Warlock) This Tiny pot bears relief scenes of heroes on its cast-iron sides. You can use the cauldron as a Spellcasting Focus for your spells, and it functions as a suitable compo- nent for the Scrying spell. Brew Potion. When you finish a Long Rest, you can use the cauldron to create a Potion of Healing (greater), which takes 1 minute. The potion lasts for 24 hours, then loses its magic if not consumed. Raise Dead. As a Magic action, you can cause the cauldron to grow large enough for a Medium crea- ture to crouch within. You can revert the cauldron to its normal size as a Magic action, harmlessly shunting anything that can't fit inside to the nearest unoccupied space. Censer or CONTROLLING AiR ELEMENTALS Crarcaran's Die SE If you place the corpse of a Humanoid into the cauldron and cover the corpse with 200 pounds of salt (which costs 10 GP) for at least 8 hours, the salt is consumed and the creature returns to life as if by Raise Dead at the next dawn. Once used, this prop- erty can't be used again for 7 days. i \| \| CENSER OF CONTROLLING AIR ELEMENTALS Wondrous Item, Rare Magic action to summon an Air Elemental. The elemental appears in an unoccupied space as close to the censer as possible, understands your lan- \| guages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears after 1 hour, when it dies, or i when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The censer \| While gently swinging this censer, you can take a \| can't be used this way again until the next dawn. CHARLATAN'S DIE \| Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement) Whenever you roll this six-sided die, you can con- trol which number it rolls. CAULORON OF Resiarx CHAPTER7\|TREASURE 243 244 Circcer or Biasrine Ciroax oF DispLacemenr Crime oF OPENING CHIME OF OPENING Wondrous Item, Rare This hollow metal tube measures about 1 foot long and weighs 1 pound. As a Magic action, you can strike the chime to cast Knock. The spell's custom- ary knocking sound is replaced by the clear, ringing tone of the chime, which is audible out to 300 feet. The chime can be used 10 times. After the tenth time, it cracks and becomes useless. CIRCLET OF BLASTING Wondrous Item, Uncommon While wearing this circlet, you can cast Scorching Ray with it (+5 to hit). The circlet can't cast this spell again until the next dawn. CLOAK OF ARACHNIDA Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This fine garment is made of black silk interwoven with faint, silvery threads. While wearing it, you gain the following benefits. Poison Resistance. You have Resistance to Poison damage. Spider Climb. You have a Climb Speed equal to your Speed and can move up, down, and across ver- tical surfaces and along ceilings, while leaving your hands free. Spider Walk. You can't be caught in webs of any sort and can move through webs as if they were Dif- ficult Terrain, Web. You can cast Web (save DC 13). The web created by the spell fills twice its normal area, Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Coax oF Browne CLOAK OF BILLOWING Wondrous Item, Common While wearing this cloak, you can take a Bonus Action to make it billow dramatically for 1 minute. CLOAK OF DISPLACEMENT Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While you wear this cloak, it magically projects an illusion that makes you appear to be standing ina place near your actual location, causing any crea- ture to have Disadvantage on attack rolls against you. If you take damage, the property ceases to function until the start of your next turn. This property is suppressed while your Speed is 0. CLOAK OF ELVENKIND Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While you wear this cloak, Wisdom (Perception) checks made to perceive you have Disadvantage, and you have Advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. CLOAK OF INVISIBILITY Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) This cloak has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the cloak, you can take a Magic action to pull its hood over your head and expend \| charge to give yourself the Invis- ible condition for 1 hour. The effect ends early if you pull the hood down (no action required) or cease wearing the cloak. Cioak oF ELveNKinD CLOAK OF MANY FASHIONS Wondrous Item, Common While wearing this cloak, you can take a Bonus Ac- tion to change the style, color, and apparent quality of the garment. The cloak's weight doesn't change. Regardless of its appearance, the cloak can't be anything but a cloak. Although it can duplicate the ap- pearance of other magic cloaks, it doesn't gain their magical properties. CLOAK OF PROTECTION Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class and saving throws while you wear this cloak. CLOAK OF THE BAT Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this cloak, you have Advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. In an area of Dim Light or Darkness, you can grip the edges of the cloak and use it to gain a Fly Speed of 40 feet. If you ever fail to grip the cloak's edges while flying in this way, or if you are no longer in Dim Light or Darkness, you lose this Fly Speed. While wearing the cloak in an area of Dim Light or Darkness, you can cast Polymorph on yourself, shape-shifting into a Bat. While in that form, you retain your Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. The cloak can't be used this way again until the next dawn. Croax or Many Faswions Coax of Prorecrion Cioak OF THE Manta Ray CLOAK OF THE MANTA RAY Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this cloak, you can breathe under- water, and you have a Swim Speed of 60 feet. CLOCKWORK AMULET Wondrous Item, Common This copper amulet contains tiny interlocking gears and is powered by magic from Mechanus, a plane of clockwork predictability. Faint ticking and whirring noises emanate from within. When you make an attack roll while wearing the amulet, you can forgo rolling the d20 to get a 10 on the die. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. CLOTHES OF MENDING Wondrous Item, Common This elegant outfit magically mends itself to coun- teract daily wear and tear. Pieces of the outfit that are destroyed can't be repaired in this way. CRYSTAL BALL Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Scry- ing (save DC 17) with it. # CHAPTER\| TREASURE 245 CRYSTAL BALL OF MIND READING Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Scry- ing (save DC 17) with it. In addition, you can cast Detect Thoughts (save DC 17) targeting creatures you can see within 30 feet of the spell's sensor. You don't need to concentrate on this Detect Thoughts spell to maintain it during its duration, but it ends if the Scrying spell ends. CRYSTAL BALL OF TELEPATHY Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Sery- ing (save DC 17) with it. In addition, you can com- municate telepathically with creatures you can see within 30 feet of the spell's sensor. You can also cast Suggestion (save DC 17) through the sensor on one of those creatures, You don't need to concentrate on this Suggestion to maintain it during its duration, but it ends if Scrying ends, You can't cast Suggestion in this way again until the next dawn. CRYSTAL BALL OF TRUE SEEING Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While touching this crystal orb, you can cast Scrying (save DC 17) with it. In addition, you have Truesight with a range of 120 feet centered on the spell's sensor. # Cube Of Force Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) This cube is about an inch across. Each face has a distinct marking on it. You can press one of those faces, expend the number of charges required for it, and thereby cast the spell associated with it (save DC 17), as shown in the Cube of Force Faces table. The cube starts with 10 charges, and it regains 1d6 expended charges daily at dawn. CusBe OF Force Faces Spell Charge Cost Mage Armor 1 Shield 1 Leomund's Tiny Hut Mordenkainen's Private Sanctum Otiluke's Resilient Sphere Wall of Force wn \> SF WwW Crvysrac Bare CuBE OF SUMMONING Wondrous Item, Rare This Tiny cube looks like a jack-in-the-box. When you wind its crank as a Magic action, a merry tune emits from the box, the lid pops open, a creature appears in the nearest unoccupied space, and the lid closes. The lid can't otherwise be opened. Roll on the Cube of Summoning table to deter- mine which spell the cube casts to summon the creature. The spell is cast at level 5 (save DC 17, +9 attack bonus) and doesn't require Concentration, but you otherwise function as the spell's caster. Once the cube summons a creature, the cube can't do so again until the next dawn. CusBe OF SUMMONING 1d6 Spell Summon Aberration Summon Beast Summon Construct Summon Dragon Summon Elemental a wu &® WH --- Summon Fey Cusic GATE Wondrous Item, Legendary This cube is 3 inches across and radiates palpable magical energy. The six sides of the cube are each keyed to a different plane of existence, one of which is the Material Plane. The other sides are linked to planes determined by the DM. The cube has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. As a Magic action, you can expend 1 of the cube's charges to cast one of the fol- lowing spells using the cube. Gate. Pressing one side of the cube, you cast Gate, opening a portal to the plane of existence keyed to that side. Plane Shift. Pressing one side of the cube twice, you cast Plane Shift, transporting the targets to the plane of existence keyed to that side. DAERN'S INSTANT FORTRESS Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) As a Magic action, you can place this 1-inch adamantine statuette on the ground and, using a command word, cause it to grow rapidly into a square adamantine tower. Repeating the command word causes the tower to revert to statuette form, which works only if the tower is empty. Each crea- ture in the area where the tower appears is pushed Daern's Instanr Forrress Cuse or SUMMONING to an unoccupied space outside but next to the tower. Objects in the area that aren't being worn or carried are also pushed clear of the tower. The tower is 20 feet on a side and 30 feet high, with arrow slits on all sides and a battlement atop it. Its interior is divided into two floors, with a ladder, staircase, or ramp (your choice) connecting them. This ladder, staircase, or ramp ends at a trapdoor leading to the roof. When created, the tower has a CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 24.7 single door at ground level on the side facing you. The door opens only at your command, which you can issue as a Bonus Action. It is immune to the Knock spell and similar magic. Magic prevents the tower from being tipped over. The roof, the door, and the walls each have AC 20; HP 100; Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage except that which is dealt by siege equipment; and Resistance to all other damage. Shrinking the tower back down to statuette form doesn't repair damage to the tower. Only a Wish spell can repair the tower (this use of the spell counts as replicating a spell of level 8 or lower). Each casting of Wish causes the tower to regain all its Hit Points. DAGGER OF VENOM Weapon (Dagger), Rare You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. You can take a Bonus Action to magically coat the blade with poison. The poison remains for 1 minute or until an attack using this weapon hits a creature. That creature must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or take 2d10 Poison damage and have the Poisoned condition for 1 minute. The weapon can't be used this way again until the next dawn. DANCING SworD Weapon (Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) You can take a Bonus Action to toss this magic weapon into the air. When you do so, the weapon begins to hover, flies up to 30 feet, and attacks one Daccer of Venom wD iat Dancine Sworo (LONGsworD) # CHAPTER \| TREASURE creature of your choice within 5 feet of itself. The weapon uses your attack roll and adds your ability modifier to damage rolls. While the weapon hovers, you can take a Bonus Action to cause it to fly up to 30 feet to another spot within 30 feet of you. As part of the same Bo- nus Action, you can cause the weapon to attack one creature within 5 feet of the weapon. After the hovering weapon attacks for the fourth time, it flies back to you and tries to return to your hand. If you have no hand free, the weapon falls to the ground in your space. If the weapon has no unobstructed path to you, it moves as close to you as it can and then falls to the ground. It also ceases to hover if you grasp it or are more than 30 feet away from it. Dark SHARD AMULET Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement by a Warlock) This amulet is fashioned from a shard of resilient material originating from an otherworldly realm. While you are wearing it, you gain the following benefits. Spellcasting Focus. You can use the amulet as a Spellcasting Focus for your Warlock spells. Unknown Spell. As a Magic action, you can try to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The cantrip must be on the Warlock spell list and have a casting time of an action, and you make a DC 10 Intelli- gence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you cast the spell. On a failed check, the spell fails, and the action used to cast it is wasted. In either case, you can't use this property again until you finish a Long Rest. a, oO ff / | I Dark Swaro \| Amucer Decanter oF Eno.ess Waren DECANTER OF ENDLESS WATER Wondrous Item, Uncommon This stoppered flask sloshes when shaken, as if it contains water. The decanter weighs 2 pounds. You can take a Magic action to remove the stop- per and issue one of three command words, where- upon an amount of fresh water or salt water (your choice) pours out of the flask. The water stops pour- ing out at the start of your next turn. Choose from the following command words: Splash. The decanter produces 1 gallon of water. Fountain. The decanter produces 5 gallons of water. Geyser. The decanter produces 30 gallons of water that gushes forth in a Line 30 feet long and 1 foot wide. If you're holding the decanter, you can aim the geyser in one direction (no action required). One creature of your choice in the Line must suc- ceed on a DC 13 Strength saving throw or take 1d4 Bludgeoning damage and have the Prone con- dition. Instead of a creature, you can target one object in the Line that isn't being worn or carried and that weighs no more than 200 pounds. The object is knocked over by the geyser. Deck OF ILLUSIONS Wondrous Item, Uncommon This box contains a set of cards. A full deck has 34 cards: 32 depicting specific creatures and two with a mirrored surface. A deck found as treasure is usu- ally missing 1d20 - 1 cards. The magic of the deck functions only if its cards are drawn at random. You can take a Magic action to draw a card at random from the deck and throw it to the ground at a point within 30 feet of yourself. An illusion of a creature, determined by rolling on the Deck of Illusions table, forms over the thrown card and remains until dispelled. The illusory crea- ture created by the card looks and behaves like a real creature of its kind, except that it can do no harm. While you are within 120 feet of the illusory creature and can see it, you can take a Magic action to move it anywhere within 30 feet of its card. Any physical interaction with the illusory crea- ture reveals it to be false, because objects pass through it. A creature that takes a Study action to visually inspect the illusory creature identifies it as an illusion with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (In- vestigation) check. The illusion lasts until its card is moved or the illusion is dispelled (using a Dispel Magic spell or a similar effect), When the illusion ends, the image on its card disappears, and that card can't be used again. # Deck Of Illusions 1d100 ---Illusion\* 01-03 Adult Red Dragon 04-06 Archmage 07-09 Assassin 10-12 Bandit Captain 13-15 Beholder 16-18 Berserker 19-21 Bugbear Warrior 22-24 Cloud Giant 25-27. Druid 28-30 Erinyes 31-33 Ettin 34-36 Fire Giant 37-39 Frost Giant 40-42 Gnoll Warrior 43-45 Goblin Warrior 46-48 Guardian Naga 49-51 Hill Giant 52-54 Hobgoblin Warrior 55-57 Incubus 58-60 Iron Golem 61-63 Knight 64-66 Kobold Warrior 67-69 Lich 70-72 Medusa 73-75 Night Hag 76-78 Ogre 79-81 Oni 82-84 Priest 85-87 Succubus 88-90 Troll 91-93 Veteran Warrior 94-96 Wyvern 97-00 The card drawer \*Stat blocks for these creatures (except the card drawer) appear in the Monster Manual. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE # 249 250 Deck OF MANY THINGS Wondrous Item, Legendary Usually found in a box or pouch, this deck contains a number of cards made of ivory or vellum. Most (75 percent) of these decks have thirteen cards, but some have twenty-two. Use the appropriate column of the Deck of Many Things table when randomly determining cards drawn from the deck. Before you draw a card, you must declare how many cards you intend to draw and then draw them randomly. Any cards drawn in excess of this number have no effect. Otherwise, as soon as you draw a card from the deck, its magic takes effect. You must draw each card no more than \| hour after the pre- vious draw. If you fail to draw the chosen number, the remaining number of cards fly from the deck on their own and take effect all at once. Once a card is drawn, it disappears. Unless the card is the Fool or Jester, the card reappears in the deck, making it possible to draw the same card twice. (Once the Fool or Jester has left the deck, re- roll on the table if that card comes up again.) Deck OF MANY THINGS 1d100 1d100 (13-Card Deck) (22-Card Deck) Card --- 01-05 Balance 06-10 Comet \_ 1-14 Donjon 01-08 15-18 Euryale *--- 19-23 Fates 09-16 24-27 Flames* 28-31 Fool oa 32-36 Gem 17-24 37-4\] Jester 25-32 42-46 Key 33-40 47-51 Knight 41-48 52-56 Moon a 57-60 Puzzle 49-56 61-64 Rogue 57-64 65-68 Ruin \_ 69-73 Sage 65-72 74-77 Skull 73-80 78-82 Star 81-88 83-87 Sun --- 88-91 Talons 89-96 92-96 Throne 97-00 97-00 Void # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Each card's effect is described below. Balance. You can increase one of your ability scores by 2, to a maximum of 22, provided you also decrease another one of your ability scores by 2. You can't decrease an ability that has a score of 5 or lower. Alternatively, you can choose not to ad- just your ability scores, in which case this card has no effect. Comet. The next time you enter combat against one or more Hostile creatures, you can select one of them as your foe when you roll Initiative. If you reduce your foe to O Hit Points during that combat, you have Advantage on Death Saving Throws for 1 year. If someone else reduces your chosen foe to 0 Hit Points or you don't choose a foe, this card has no effect. Donjon. You disappear and become entombed in a state of suspended animation in an extradi- mensional sphere. Everything you're wearing and carrying disappears with you except for Artifacts, which stay behind in the space you occupied when you disappeared. You remain imprisoned until you are found and removed from the sphere. You can't be located by any Divination magic, but a Wish spell can reveal the location of your prison. You draw no more cards. Euryale. The card's medusa-like visage curses you. You take a -2 penalty to saving throws while cursed in this way. Only a god or the magic of the Fates card can end this curse. Fates. Reality's fabric unravels and spins anew, al- lowing you to avoid or erase one event as if it never happened. You can use the card's magic as soon as you draw the card or at any other time before you die. Flames. A powerful devil becomes your enemy. The devil seeks your ruin and torments you, savor- ing your suffering before attempting to slay you. This enmity lasts until either you or the devil dies. --- --- A QUESTION OF ENMITY Two of the cards in the Deck of Many Things can earn a character the enmity of another being. With the Flames card, the enmity is overt. The character should experience the devil's malevolent efforts on multiple occasions. Seeking out the fiend shouldn't be a simple task, and the adventurer should clash with the devil's allies and followers a few times before being able to con- front the devil. In the case of the Rogue card, the enmity is secret and should come from someone thought to be a friend or an ally. As Dungeon Master, you should wait for a dramatically appropriate mo- ment to reveal this enmity, leaving the adventurer guessing who is likely to become a betrayer. ha Fool. You have Disadvantage on D20 Tests for the next 72 hours. Draw another card; this draw doesn't count as one of your declared draws. Gem. Twenty-five pieces of jewelry worth 2,000 GP each or fifty gems worth 1,000 GP each appear at your feet. Jester. You have Advantage on D20 Tests for the next 72 hours, or you can draw two additional cards beyond your declared draws. Key. A Rare or rarer magic weapon with which you are proficient appears on your person. The DM chooses the weapon. Knight. You gain the service of a Knight, who magically appears in an unoccupied space you choose within 30 feet of yourself. The knight has the same alignment as you and serves you loyally until death, believing the two of you have been drawn together by fate. Work with your DM to cre- ate a name and backstory for this NPC. The DM can use a different stat block to represent the knight, as desired. Moon. You gain the ability to cast Wish 1d3 times. Puzzle. Permanently reduce your Intelligence or Wisdom by 1d4 + 1 (to a minimum score of 1). You can draw one additional card beyond your declared draws. Rogue. An NPC of the DM's choice becomes Hos- tile toward you. You don't know the identity of this NPC until they or someone else reveals it. Nothing less than a Wish spell or divine intervention can end the NPC's hostility toward you. Ruin. All forms of wealth that you carry or own, other than magic items, are lost to you. Portable property vanishes. Businesses, buildings, and land you own are lost in a way that alters reality the least. If you have a Bastion (see chapter 8), it is destroyed by some calamity beyond your control. Any documentation that proves you should own something lost to this card also disappears. Sage. At any time you choose within one year of drawing this card, you can ask a question in medita- tion and mentally receive a truthful answer to that question. Skull. An Avatar of Death (see the accompanying stat block) appears in an unoccupied space as close to you as possible. The avatar targets only you with its attacks, appearing as a ghostly skeleton clad ina tattered black robe and carrying a spectral scythe. The avatar disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or you die. If an ally of yours deals damage to the avatar, that ally summons another Avatar of Death. The new avatar appears in an unoccupied space as close to that ally as possible and targets only that ally with its attacks. You and your allies can each summon only one avatar as a consequence of this draw. A creature slain by an avatar can't be restored to life. # Cards Froma Deck oF Many Tuincs # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 251 252 Poe ie = ---\_------ ree. a # Avatar Of Death Medium Undead, Neutral Evil AC 20 Initiative +3 (13) HP Half the HP maximum of its summoner Speed 60 ft., Fly 60 ft. (hover) # Mod Save Mod Save # Mod Save Str 16 +3 +3 Dex 16 +3 +3 Conl6 43 43 Int 16 43 +3. Wis 16 43 43 CHAI6 43 43 Immunities Necrotic, Poison; Charmed, Exhaustion, Frightened, Paralyzed, Petrified, Poisoned, Unconscious Senses Truesight 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 Languages All languages known to its summoner CR None (XP 0; PB equals its summoner's) TRAITS Incorporeal Movement. The avatar can move through other creatures and objects as if they were Difficult Ter- rain. It takes 5 (1d10) Force damage if it ends its turn inside an object. AcTIONS Multiattack. The avatar makes a number of Reaping Scythe attacks equal to half the summoner's Profi- ciency Bonus (rounded up). Reaping Scythe. Melee Attack Roll: Automatic hit, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) Slashing damage plus 4 (1d8) Necrotic damage. Star. Increase one of your ability scores by 2, toa maximum of 24. Sun. A magic item (chosen by the DM) appears on your person. In addition, you gain 10 Temporary Hit Points daily at dawn until you die. Talons. Every magic item you wear or carry disintegrates. Artifacts in your possession vanish instead. Throne. You gain proficiency and Expertise in your choice of History, Insight, Intimidation, or Per- suasion. In addition, you gain rightful ownership of a small keep somewhere in the world. However, the keep is currently home to one or more monsters, which must be cleared out before you can claim the keep as yours. Void. Your soul is drawn from your body and contained in an object in a place of the DM's choice. One or more powerful beings guard the place. While your soul is trapped in this way, your body is inert, ceases aging, and requires no food, air, or wa- ter. A Wish spell can't return your soul to your body, but the spell reveals the location of the object that holds your soul. You draw no more cards. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE OS ae i DEFENDER Weapon (Any Melee Weapon), Legendary (Requires Attunement) You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. The first time you attack with the weapon on each of your turns, you can transfer some or all of the weapon's bonus to your Armor Class. For example, you could reduce the bonus to your attack rolls and damage rolls to +1 and gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class. The adjusted bonuses remain in effect until the start of your next turn, although you must hold the weapon to gain a bonus to AC from it. i \~ DEMON ARMOR Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class, and you know Abyssal. In addition, the armor's clawed gauntlets allow your Unarmed Strikes to deal 1d8 Slashing damage instead of the usual Bludgeoning damage, and you gain a +1 bonus to the attack and damage rolls of your Unarmed Strikes. Curse. Once you don this cursed armor, you can't doff it unless you are targeted by a Remove Curse spell or similar magic. While wearing the armor, you have Disadvantage on attack rolls against de- mons and on saving throws against their spells and special abilities. r \~ = \~ \~ a DEMONOMICON OF IGGWILV Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement) This treatise, composed by Iggwilv the archmage, documents the Abyss's layers and inhabitants and is widely regarded as the most thorough and blas- phemous tome of demonology in the multiverse. The tome recounts both the oldest and most current profanities of the Abyss and demons. Demons have attempted to censor the text, and while sections have been ripped from the book's spine, the general chapters remain, ever revealing demonic secrets. Caged behind lines of script roils a secret piece of the Abyss itself, which keeps the book up-to-date, no matter how many pages are removed, and it longs to be more than mere reference material. Abyssal Lore. You can reference the Demonomicon whenever you make an Intelligence check to discern information about demons or a Wisdom (Survival) check related to the Abyss. When you do so, you gain Advantage on the check. Containment. The first ten pages of the Demonom- icon are blank. As a Magic action while holding the book, you can target a Fiend that you can see that is trapped within the area of a Magic Circle spell. The Fiend must succeed on a DC 20 Charisma saving throw with Disadvantage or become trapped within one of the Demonomicon's blank pages, which fills with writing detailing the trapped creature's widely known name and depravities. Once used, this action can't be used again until the next dawn. When you finish a Long Rest, if you and the De- monomicon are on the same plane of existence, one trapped creature within the book can attempt to possess you. You make a DC 20 Charisma saving throw. On a failed save, you are possessed by the creature, which controls you like a puppet. As a Magic action, the possessing creature can release you and appear in the closest unoccupied space to you. On a successful save, the Fiend can't try to pos- sess you again for 7 days (but another Fiend trapped in the book can certainly try). When the tome is discovered, it has 1d4 Fiends occupying its pages---typically an assortment of demons. Ensnarement. While carrying the book, whenever you cast Magic Circle naming only Fiends or cast Planar Binding targeting a Fiend, the spell is cast at level 9, regardless of what level spell slot you used, if any. Additionally, the Fiend has Disadvantage on its saving throw against the spell. Fiendish Scourging. While carrying the book, when you make a damage roll for a spell you cast against a Fiend, you use the maximum possible result instead of rolling. Random Properties. The Artifact has the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - 2 minor beneficial properties - 1 minor detrimental property » 1 major detrimental property Spells. The book has 8 charges and regains 1d8 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the book, you can take a Magic action to cast one of the spells (save DC 20) on the following table. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. DemMoNnomicon of Iocwitv Spell Charge Cost Magic Circle 1 Magic Jar 3 Planar Ally 3 Planar Binding 2 i Plane Shift (to the Abyss only) 3 Summon Fiend 3 Tasha's Hideous Laughter 0 Destroying the Demonomicon. To destroy the book, six different demon lords must each tear out a sixth of the book's pages. If this occurs, the pages reappear after 24 hours. Before all those hours pass, \| anyone who opens the book's remaining binding is transported to a nascent layer of the Abyss that lies hidden within the book. At the heart of this deadly, semisentient domain lies a long-lost Artifact, Fraz- Urb'luu's Staff. If the staff is dragged from the pocket plane, the tome is reduced to a mundane and out-of- date copy of the Tome of Zyx, the work that served as the foundation of the Demonomicon of Iggwilv. The Tome of Zyx can be destroyed like any ordinary book. Once the staff emerges, the demon lord Fraz- Urb'luu knows instantly. Demon ARMOR (PLare Armor) Derenoer (GreaTsworo)