# Despair, And Oread The following Domains of Dread are among the most infamous. They are described in more detail in Van Richten's Guide to Ravenloft. Barovia. The towering spires of Castle Ravenloft loom above the valley of Barovia, which is ruled by Strahd von Zarovich, the first vampire. Borca. Amid opulent estates and impoverished villages, two Darklords---the vicious poisoner Ivana Boritsi and the childishly cruel stalker Ivan Dilisnya---pursue their obsessive schemes. Falkovnia. Empty countryside surrounds ruined or crumbling cities, with only a few pockets of civ- ilization fighting a losing battle against an endless plague of zombies. General Vladeska Drakov com- mands a fierce military force that desperately clings to power. Kalakeri. A beautiful land of rainforests, rivers, and lakes is a quagmire of intrigue and despair as three royal heirs---transformed into monsters by their depravity and hatred---battle endlessly to claim the throne of their ancient dynasty. Lamordia. Inventors and scholars violate both natural and moral laws amid the frozen bogs and glacial expanses of Lamordia. The worst of them is the domain's Darklord, Doctor Viktra Mordenheim, ae whose efforts to create life and abolish death have led to the creation of many monsters. Mordent. Death in Mordent heralds the beginning of a haunted afterlife as a restless spirit, for this domain is the realm of ghost stories and hauntings. The dead here earn no rest, no finality, no peace--- just a passage into a shadow world of wispy phan- toms, mournful groaning, and clanking chains. Valachan. The devious hunter Chajuna roams the jungles of her domain, hunting the most dangerous beasts she can find. When she grows dissatisfied with simpler prey, she draws people into a fatal contest, ensuring that the land remains steeped in blood. # Shadowfell Despair A melancholic atmosphere pervades the Shadowfell, and extended forays to this plane can afflict charac- ters with despair. When you deem it appropriate, though usually not more than once per day, you can require a char- acter not from the Shadowfell to make a DC 10 Wis- dom saving throw. On a failed save, the character is affected by despair. Roll on the Shadowfell Despair # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 209 table to determine the effects. You can substitute different despair effects of your own creation. SHADOWFELL DESPAIR 1d6 Effect 1-3 Apathy. The character has Disadvantage on Death Saving Throws and Initiative rolls. 4-5 Dread. The character has Disadvantage on all saving throws. 6 Delusion. The character has Disadvantage on ability checks and saving throws that use Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma. If a character is already suffering a despair effect and fails the saving throw, the new despair effect replaces the old one. After finishing a Long Rest, a character can attempt to overcome the despair with a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. (The DC is higher because it's harder to shake off despair once it has taken hold.) On a successful save, the despair effect ends for that character. A Calm Emotions spell or magic that removes curses cures the despair. SIGIL, CiTy or Doors At the center of the Outlands, like the axle of a great wheel, is the Spire, a needle-shaped mountain that rises high into the sky. Above this mountain's narrow peak, not part of the Outlands but a plane in its own right, floats the ring-shaped city of Sigil, its myriad structures built on the ring's inner sur- face. Creatures standing on one of Sigil's streets can see the city curve up over their heads and---most disconcerting of all---the far side of the city directly overhead. Called the City of Doors, this bustling planar metropolis holds countless portals to other planes and worlds. Sigil is a trader's paradise. Goods and information come here from across the planes. The city sustains a brisk trade in information about the planes, par- ticularly the commands or items required for the operation of particular portals. The city is the domain of the inscrutable Lady of Pain, a being whose purpose and goals are unknown to even the sages of her city. She appears almost human, although she most definitely isn't. She wears ornate robes that shroud her body, and a mantle of blades coated in blue-green verdigris surrounds her masklike face. No one is certain who or what exactly the Lady of Pain is, but it's widely accepted she's a being on par with deities. Is Sigil her prison? Is she the fallen creator of the multiverse? No one knows----or if they do, they aren't telling. Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse includes extensive information on Sigil. YSGARD Ysgard is a rugged realm of soaring mountains, deep fjords, and windswept battlefields, with summers that are long and hot and winters that are cold and unforgiving. Its continents float above oceans of volcanic rock, below which are enormous icy cav- erns that hold entire kingdoms of giants, humans, dwarves, gnomes, and other beings. Heroes come to Ysgard to test their mettle not only against the plane itself, but also against giants, dragons, and other mighty creatures across Ysgard's vast terrain. Ysgard is the home of slain heroes who wage eternal battle on fields of glory. Any creature, other than a Construct or Undead, that is killed in combat while in Ysgard is restored to life at dawn the next day. The creature has all its Hit Points restored, and all conditions that affected it before its death are removed, LAYERS OF YSGARD Layer Description Ysgard Immense rivers of floating earth grind together in eternal rumbling. Muspelheim The ground smokes and burns be- neath the earthbergs of the top layer. Nidavellir Floating chunks of earth are closer together, giving the appearance of endless tunnels with rich mineral deposits. # Ysgard Adventures The nature of Ysgard is glory earned through heroic deeds in battle. It's the euphoria of an athlete, the exhilaration of a summer storm, and the trium- phant celebration of victory. Since those who die on the plane return to life to fight again the next day, Ysgard can overlook the horrors of war and focus entirely on the glory. An adventure in Ysgard can be an opportunity for lighthearted combat without consequences, for characters to prove their mettle against truly epic foes and perhaps even against each other. Adven- turers might find themselves on the Plain of Ida on the topmost layer of Ysgard, where daily festivals let warriors and athletes show off their bravery and skill. Or they might venture into the lower layers to face greater challenges---or secrets buried in the deep caverns of the plane. In THE CosmopoiitaN Steerer: or Sa CREATURES FROM ACROSS TE wen teeease COSRIST IN EWEAsy reece See FR 7 y ' OSTTHE BLACK ORAGON ONYX GUARDS HER TREASURE HOARD IN THE RUINS OF Xak TsaRorn.. \_------ # Chapter 7 TREASURE DVENTURERS STRIVE FOR MANY THINGS, including glory, knowledge, and justice. Many adventurers also seek something more tangible: treasure. This chapter presents treasure in all its forms, from coins to magic items. # 'treasure Themes Monsters have treasure preferences, as explained in the Monster Manual. These preferences are ex- pressed as themes, which helps you determine what treasures are found in monsters' hoards, as summa- rized in the Treasure Themes table. For advice on how to include treasure in an adventure, see "Adventure Rewards" in chapter 4. To randomly determine a magic item found as treasure, use the tables at the end of this chapter. # Treasure Themes Theme Appropriate Treasure Arcana Gemstones plus magic items of an eldritch or esoteric nature Armaments Coins or trade bars plus magic items that are useful in battle Implements Coins, trade bars, or trade goods plus magic items that focus on utility Relics Art objects plus magic items that have religious origins or purposes CoINs The most basic type of treasure is money, including Copper Pieces (CP), Silver Pieces (SP), Electrum Pieces (EP), Gold Pieces (GP), and Platinum Pieces (PP). See the Player's Handbook for their relative value. Fifty coins of any type weigh 1 pound. # 'trade Bars Because large numbers of coins can be difficult to transport and account for, many merchants prefer to use trade bars---ingots of precious metals and alloys (usually silver), These bars are valued by weight, as shown in the Trade Bars table. TRADE Bars Bar Value Dimensions 2-pound silver bar 10 GP Sin. long x 2 in. wide x 1/2 in. thick 5-pound silverbar 25GP\_ 6in. long x 2in. wide x 1 in. thick 250GP 5in. long x 2 in. wide x 3/4 in. thick 5-pound gold bar 'TRADE GOopDs Merchants commonly exchange trade goods with- out using currency. The Trade Goods table shows the value of commonly exchanged goods. TRADE Goops Cost Goods 1CP 1b. of wheat 2CP 2b. of flour or one chicken SCP 1 Ib. of salt 1SP 1b. of iron or 1 sq. yd. of canvas SSP 1b. of copper or 1 sq. yd. of cotton cloth 1GP\_ 1 Ib. of ginger or one goat 2GP 1b. of cinnamon or pepper, or one sheep 3.GP 1 \|b. of cloves or one pig 5GP 1b. of silver or 1 sq. yd. of linen 10GP 1 Ib. of silk or one cow 15GP\_ 1 Ib. of saffron or one ox 50GP\_ 1 Ib. of gold 500 GP 1b. of platinum # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 213 GEMSTONES Gemstones are small, lightweight, and easily se- cured compared to their same value in coins. Ifa treasure hoard includes gemstones, you can use the following tables to randomly determine the kind of gemstones found, based on their value. You can roll once and assume all the gems are the same or roll multiple times to create mixed collections. 10 GP GEMSTONES 1412 Stone 1 Azurite (mottled deep blue) 2 Banded agate (striped brown, blue, white, or red) Blue quartz (pale blue) Eye agate (circles of gray, white, brown, dlue, or green) Hematite (gray black) Lapis lazuli (light and dark blue with yellow flecks) Malachite (striated fight and dark green) Moss agate (pink or yellow white with mossy gray or green markings) Obsidian (black) Rhodochrosite (light pink) Tiger eye (brown with golden center) Turquoise {light blue green) 50 GP Gemstones 1412 Stone 1 Bloodstone (dark gray with red flecks) Carnelian (orange to red brown) Chalcedony (white) Chrysoprase (green) Citrine {pale yellow brown) Jasper (blue, black, or brown) Moonstone (white with pale-blue glow) Onyx {bands of black and white, or pure black or white) 'Quartz (white, smoky gray, or yellow) Sardonyx (bands of red and white) Star rose quartz (rosy stone with white star- shaped center} Zircon (pale blue green} CHAPTER? \| TREASURE 100 GP GemsTONES 1410 Stone 1 wen nw Bw Ww 3S Amber (watery gold to rich gold) Amethyst (deep purple) Chrysoberyl (yellow green to pale green) Coral (crimson) Gamet (red, brown green, or violet) Jade (light green, deep green, or white) Jet (deep black) Pearl (lustrous white, yellow, or pink} Spinel (red, red brown, of deep green) Tourmaline (pale green, blue, brown, or red} 500 GP Gemstones 1d6 1 Stone Alexandrite (dark green) Aquamarine (pale blue green) Black pear! (pure black} Blue spinel (deep blue) Peridot (rich olive green) Topaz (golden yellow) 1,000 GP Gemstones 1d8 1 Stone Black opal (dark green with black mottling and golden flecks) Blue sapphire (medium blue) Emerald (deep bright green) Fire opal (fiery red) Opal (pale blue with green and golden mottling); Star ruby (ruby with white star-shaped center} 'Star sapphire (blue sapphire with white star- shaped center} Yellow sapphire (fiery yellow or yellow green) 5,000 GP Gemstones 1d4 1 Stone Black sapphire (lustrous black with glowing highlights) Diamond (blue white, canary, pink, brown, or blue) Jacinth (fiery orange) Ruby (clear red to deep crimson) 216 Macic ITEMS Magic items are gleaned from the hoards of felled monsters or discovered in long-lost vaults. Such items grant capabilities a character could rarely have otherwise, or they complement their owner's capabilities in wondrous ways, Macic Irem CATEGORIES Every magic item belongs to a category. The Magic Item Categories table lists the nine categories and provides examples, Rules for the categories appear after the table. Macic Irem Catecories Category Examples Armor +I Leather Armor, +1 Shield Potions Potion of Healing Rings Ring of Invisibility Rods Immovable Rod Scrolls 'Spell Scroll Staffs Staff of Striking Wands Wand of Fireballs Weapons +1 Ammunition, +1 Longsword Wondrous Items Bag of Holding, Boots of Elvenkind ARMOR An item in the Armor category is typically a mag- ical version of armor from the Player's Handbook, Unless an armor's description notes otherwise, the armor must be worn for its magic to function. Some suits of magic armor specify the type of ar- mor they are, such as Chain Mail or Plate Armor. If no type is specified, choose the type or determine it randomly. Potions An item in the Potion category might be a magical brew that must be imbibed or an oil that must be applied to a creature or an object. A typical potion consists of l ounce of liquid in a vial. Using a Potion. Potions are consumable items. Drinking a potion or administering it to another creature requires a Bonus Action. Applying an oil might take longer as specified in its description. Once used, a potion takes effect immediately, and it is used up, Mixing Potions, A character might drink one po- tion while still under the effects of another or pour several potions into a single container. The strange ingredients used in creating potions can result in unpredictable interactions. When a character mixes two potions together, roll on the Potion Miscibility table, If more than # CHAPTER \| TREASURE two are combined, roll again for each subsequent potion, combining the results. Uniess the effects are immediately obvious, reveal them only when they become evident, Potion Miscisiity 14100 Result 01 Both potions lose their effects, and the mixture creates a magical explosion in a \_5.foot-radius Sphere centered on itself, Each creature in that area takes 4410 Force damage, 92-08 Both potions lose their effects, and the mix: ture becomes an ingested poison of your choice (see "Poison" in chapter 3), 09-15 Both potions lose their effects. 16-25 One potion loses its effect. 26-35 Both potions work, but with their numerical effects and durations halved. Ifa potion has no numerical effect and no duration, it instead loses its effect. 36-90 Both potions work normally. 91-99 Both potions work, but the numerical effects and duration of one potion are doubled. If neither potion has anything to double in this way, they work normally, 00 = Only one potion works, but its effects are permanent. Choose the simplest effect to make permanent or the one that seems the most fun. For example, a Potion of Healing might increase the drinker's Hit Point max- imurn by 2d4 + 2, or a Potion of Invisibility might give the drinker the Invisible condi- tion indefinitely, At your discretion, a Dispel Magic spell or similar magic might end this lasting effect. RINGS For its magic to function, an item in the Ring cat- egory must be worn on a finger or a similar digit unless its description notes otherwise, Rops An item in the Rod category is a scepter usually made of metal, wood, or bone. A typical rod weighs 2 to 5 pounds. Unless its description notes otherwise, a rod can be used as an Arcane Focus, Scroiis An item in the Scroll category is a roll of paper or parchment, sometimes attached to wooden rods and typically kept safe in a tube of ivory, jade, leather, Macic Items Awarvep ay Lever Character Level Common Uncommon (Tier of Play) items Items 1-4 {tier 1) 6 4 5-10 (tier 2) a1) W '11-16 (tier 3). 3 7 17-20 {tier 4) 0 9 Total cy 28 AWARDING Macic ITEMS Awarding magic items is the purview of the DM, You can award a magic item because the story calls \| for it or the players would be especially pleased to have it. This section helps you to determine which magic items end up in the characters' possession, i Macic Irems Awagpep sy Lever The Magic \[tems Awarded by Level table shows the number of magic items a D&D party typically gains during a campaign, totaling one hundred magic items by level 20, The table shows how many items of each rarity are meant to be handed out during \| each of the four tiers of play, Artifacts are omitted from the table because they \| are most often used as plot devices in high-level ad- ventures, and characters rarely have them for long (either because the Artifacts are meant to be de- stroyed or because the campaign is nearing its end). Player Wish List, Encourage your players to keep a wish list of magic items they hope their charac- ters will find in the course of the campaign. If you want to award a magic item but don't have a specific magic item in mind, you can pick an item of the ap- propriate rarity from your players' wish list. Overstocking an Adventure. When creating or modifying an adventure, assume that the characters won't find all the magic items you place in it. An ad- venture usually can include a number of items that's 25 percent higher than the number in the Magic Items Awarded by Level table (round up). For exam- ple, an adventure designed to take characters from \_ 'The D&D game assumes that magic items sppear sporadically and that they are a boon unless an item bears a curse. Characters and monsters are built to face each other without the help of magic items, which means that having a magic item makes a character more powerful or versa- tile than a generic character of the same level, 'As DM, you never have to worry about awarding magic so the characters can keep up with the campaign's threats. Magic items are truly i prizes---desirable but not necessary, Rare Very Rare Legendary Alt Items tems Items Items 1 0 0 qn 6 1 0 34 n - 2 30 5 V g 25 2 9 n 100 level \| to 4 might include fourteen items rather than eleven, in the expectation that three items won't be found. Macic Irem TRACKER You can use the Magic Item 'Tracker sheet to track how many magic items the characters have ac- quired. Each time the characters get a magic item, put a check mark in one of the empty circles corre\~ sponding to the item's rarity and the current level range of the characters. If the characters gain a magic item of a rarity that has no unchecked circles at the current level range, check off an empty circle from a lower tier. If all lower level ranges also have no circles teft, check off an empty circle from a higher level range. RANDOM Macic Irem Rarity When you decide that a treasure contains magic items, there are two ways to determine the rarity of those items, You can choose an appropriate rarity based on the items you've given out already (using the Magic Item Tracker sheet to keep track), or you can roll on the Magic Item Rarities table. To use the table, find the level of the characters in the top row, Roll 1d100, and read down that column to find your roll. Then read across to the right col- umn to find the rarity of the item. Macic trem Rarities 14100 Roll Levels Levels Levels Levels item's 4 5-10 «1-16 17-20 'Rarity 01-54 01-30 01-11 --- Common 55-91 31-81-1234 - Uncommon 92-00 82-98 35-70 01-20 Rare nd 99-00 71-93 21-64 Very Rare = = 94-00 65-00 Legendary ACTIVATING A MaGIc ITEM It usually takes a Magic action to activate a magic item. The item's user might also need to do some- thing special. The description of each item category or individual item details how an item is activated, 220 =\~ \~ Macic Items For STARTING CHARACTERS if you're starting a campaign for characters above level 1, the Player's Handbook offers sugges- tions for how many magic items such characters should start with and the rarity of those items. Consider these approaches to determining the items each character receives: DM Choice. Choose items for each character us- ing your own judgment. Player Choice. Let the players choose whatever items they want, within the specified ranty. Random Determination, Use the tables at the end of this chapter to randomly determine starting items. Use the Arcana tables for Sorcerers, War- locks, and Wizards, Use the Armaments tables for Barbarians, Fighters, Paladins, and Rangers, Use the Implements tables for Bards, Monks, and Rogues. Use the Relics tables for Clerics and Druids, Feel free to vary the tables you use to give each character a mix of useful items and to match character themes. For example, for a Fighter with the Eldritch Knight subclass, you might choose one item from the Arcana tables and the rest of the character's items from the Armaments tables. Certain items use the following rules for their activation. ComMAND WorpD Acommand word is a word or short phrase that must be spoken or signed for an item to work. Spo- ken command words must be audible and fail to work in areas where all sound is suppressed, as in the area of the Silence spell. ConsuMABLE ITEMS Some items are consumed---used up, in other words---when they are activated. A Potion of Healing must be swallowed, for example, while the writing vanishes from a scroll when it is read. Once used. a consumable item loses its magic, Speits CAsT FROM ITEMS Some magic items allow the user to cast a spell from the item. The spell is cast at the lowest possible spell and caster level, doesn't expend any of the user's spell slots, and requires no components unless the item's description notes otherwise. The spell uses its normal casting time, range, and duration, and the user of the item must concentrate if the spell re\~ quires Concentration. Many items, such as Potions, bypass the casting of a spell and confer the spell's effects with its usual duration, Certain items make exceptions to these rules, changing the casting time, duration, or other parts of a spell. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE A magic item may require the user to use their own spellcasting ability when casting a spell from the item. If the user has more than one spellcasting ability, the user chooses which one to use with the item. If the user doesn't have a spellcasting ability, their spellcasting ability modifier is +O for the item, and the user's Proficiency Bonus applies. CHARGES Some magic items have charges that must be ex- pended to activate their properties. The number of charges an item has remaining is revealed when the Identify spell is cast on it. A creature attuned to an item knows how many charges the item has and how many it regains. "THE Next Dawn" recharge at the next dawn or some other specified time. If such an item is on a world or plane of exis- tence where the specified event doesn't occur, the DM determines when the item recharges, Cursep ITEMS A magic item's description specifies whether it bears a curse, Most methods of identifying items, includ- ing the Identify spell, fail to reveal such a curse. Attunement to a cursed item can't be ended volun- tarily unless the curse is broken first, such as with a Remove Curse spell. Macic ITEM RESILIENCE A magic item is at least as durable as a nonmagical item of its kind. Most magic items, other than Po- tions and Scrolls, have Resistance to all damage. An Artifact can be destroyed only in some special way. Otherwise, it is impervious to damage. Learn- ing how to destroy an Artifact usually requires research or the completion of a quest, Crartine Macic ITEMs 'The Player's Handbook contains rules on brewing Potions of Healing and scribing Spell Scrolls. To create other magic items, follow the rules below, In these rules, "you" refers to the character crafting the magic item, # Arcana Proficiency To craft a magic item, you and any assistants must have proficiency in the Arcana skill, 'TooLs The Magic Item Tools table lists which tool is re- quired to make a magic item of each category, You must use the required tool to make an item and have proficiency with that tool. Any assistants must also have proficiency with it. For more information on the tools, see the Player's Handbook. Macic rem SpeciaL FEATURES You can add distinctiveness to a magic item by thinking about its backstory, Who made the item? Is anything unusual about its construction? Why was it made, and how was it used originally? What minor magical quirks set it apart from other items of its kind? Answering these questions can help turn a generic magic item, such as a +1 Longsword, into a more flavorful discovery, Use the following tables to fill in details about a magic item's history, Some table entries make more sense for certain items than for others, If you voll something that doesn't make sense, roll again, choose a more appropriate entry, or use the rolled detail as inspiration to make up your own special feature. On the Magic Item's Minor Property table and the Magic Item's Quirk table, "you" refers to the item's bearer, Macic ITem's Creator or INTENDED User 1d20 Creator or Intended User 1 Aberration. The item is ancient. At a glance, it seems to be covered with mucus. 2 Celestial. The item is half the normal weight and inscribed with feathered wings, suns, and stars, Fiends find it repulsive, 3 Devotees of Lolth. The item is half the nor- mal weight. It is inscribed with spiders and webs in honor of Lolth. 4 Dragon, This item incorporates precious metals and gems from a dragon's hoard. It grows warm when within 120 feet of a Dragon, 5-6 Dwarf. The item is durable and has Dwar- vish runes worked into its design. It might be associated with a clan that would like to see it returned to their ancestral halls. 7 Elemental Air. The item is half the normal weight and feels hollow, If it's made of fab- fic, it is diaphanous. 8 Elemental Earth. This item might be crafted from stone. Any cloth or leather elements are studded with finely polished rack. 9 Elemental Fire. This item is warm to the touch, and any metal parts are crafted from black iron. Flame imagery covers its surface, CHAPTER \| TREASURE 1420 N-12 BES 14 BFS 6 17-19 Creator or Intended User Elemental Water. Lustrous fish scales re- place leather or cloth on this item, and seashells and worked coral (as hard as any metal) replace metal portions, Elf. The item is half the normal weight. It is adorned with symbols of nature: leaves, vines, stars, and the like. Fey. The item is exquisitely crafted from the finest materials and glows with a pale radi- ance in moonlight, shedding Dim Light in a 5-foot radius. Any metal in the item is silver or mithral rather than iron or steel, Fiend. The iter is made of iron or horn, and any cloth or feather components are crafted from the hide of Fiends. Leering faces or vile runes are engraved on its sur- face. Celestials find it repulsive. Giant. The item is larger than normal and was crafted by Giants for use by their smaller allies. Gnome. The item is crafted to appear ordi- nary and well used. It could also incorporate gears and mechanical components, even if these aren't essential to its function, Human, The item was created during the heyday of a fallen human kingdom, or it is tied to. a human of legend. It might hold writing in a forgotten language or symbols whose significance is lost to the ages. Undead, The item incorporates symbols of death, such as bones and skulls, and it might be crafted from parts of corpses. It feels cold to the touch. Macic Item's History # 148 1 History Arcane. This item was created for an an- cient order of spelicasters and bears the order's symbol. Bane, This item was created to oppose creatures of a particular type, such as Aberrations or Dragons, Heroic. A great hero once wielded this item, Anyone who knows the item's history ex- pects great deeds from the new owner. Omament. The item honors a special event, Inset gemstones, gold or platinum inlays, and gold or silver filigree adorn its surface. # Art Objects Idols cast of solid gold, necklaces studded with pre- cious stones, paintings of ancient kings, bejeweled dishes---art objects include all these and more. if a treasure hoard includes art objects, you can use the following tables to randomly determine what art objects are found, based on their value, Roll on a table as many times as there are art ob- jects in the treasure hoard. There can be more than one of a given art object. 25 GP Art Osjects 1d10 Object 1 Silver ewer Carved bone statuette Gold bracelet Cloth-of-gold vestments Black velvet mask stitched with silver thread Copper chalice with silver filigree Pair of engraved bone dice Handheld mirror set in a painted wooden frame 9 Embroidered silk handkerchief 10 Gold locket with a painted portrait inside On nw bh wn 250 GP Art Ogjects 1d10 Object 1 Gold ring set with bloodstones 2. Carved ivory statuette 3 Bejeweled gold bracelet 4 Silver necklace with a gernstone pendant 5. Bronze crown 6 Silk vestments with gold embroidery 7 Well-made tapestry that is 10 feet by 10 feet 8 Brass mug with jade inlay 9 Box of turquoise animal figurines 10 Gold birdcage with electrum filigree 750 GP Art Osjects 1d10 Object 1 Silver chalice set with moonstones 2 Bundle of sheet music representing the lost dirges of a famous composer 3. Carved wooden harp with ivory inlay and zircon gems 4 Gold idol 1d10 Object 5 Gold comb shaped like a dragon with red garnets as eyes 6 Bottle stopper cork embossed with gold leaf and set with amethysts 7 Detailed, life-sized dragonborn skull cast in electrum 8 Silver and gold brooch 9 Obsidian statuette with gold fittings and inlay 10 Painted gold war mask 2,500 GP Art Oajects 1d10 Object 1 Fine gold chain set with a fire opal 2 Old masterpiece painting 3 Embroidered silk and velvet mantle set with numerous moonstones 3 Platinum bracelet set with an emerald Embroidered glove set with jewel chips Jeweled anklet Gold music box Gold circlet set with four aquamarines Eye patch decorated with tiny blue sapphires and moonstones: 10 Anecklace string of small pink pearls VDonnw = 7,500 GP Art Osjects 1d10 Object Jeweled gold crown, Jeweled platinum ring Gold statuette set with rubies Gold cup set with emeralds Gold jewelry box with platinum filigree Set of gold nesting dolls Jade game board with gold playing pieces Bejeweled ivory drinking horn with gold filigree Gilded royal coach or funeral barge 10 Ceremonial gold armor with black pearls ow nh ek wn o # CHAPTER \| TREASURE metal, or wood, The most prevalent scroll is the Spell Scroll, a spell stored in written form. However, some scrolls, like the Scroll of Protection, bear an in- cantation that isn't a spell. Using a Scroll. Scrolls are consumable items, Un- leashing the magic in a scroll requires the user to read the scroll. When its magic has been invoked, the scroll can't be used again. Its words fade, or it crumbles into dust, Any creature that can understand a written lan- guage can read a scroll and attempt to activate it unless its description notes otherwise. STAFFs Items in the Staff category vary widely in appear- ance: some are of nearly equal diameter throughout and smooth, others are gnarled and twisted, some are made of wood, and others are composed of pol- ished metal or crystal. A staff weighs between 2 and 7 pounds and serves well as a walking stick or cane. Unless its description notes otherwise, a staff can be used as a nonmagical Quarterstaff and an Arcane Focus. WANDS An item in the Wand category is typically 12 to 15 inches long and crafted of metal, bone, or wood. It is tipped with metal, crystal, stone, or some other material. Unless its description notes otherwise, a wand can be used as an Arcane Focus. WEAPONS A magic weapon is typically a magical version of a weapon from the Player's Handbook. Some magic weapons specify the type of weapon they are in their descriptions, such as a Longsword or Longbow. If na weapon type is specified, you may choose the type or determine it randomly, Ammunition. If a magic weapon has the Ammuni- tion property, ammunition fired from it is consid- ered magical for the purpose of any rule that cares whether a weapon is magical or not. Wonprous ITEMS Wondrous Items include wearable items such as boots, betts, capes, amulets, brooches, and circlets. Bags, carpets, figurines, horns, musical instruments, and more also fall into this category. Macic ITem RARITY Every magic item has a rarity, which provides a rough measure of an item's power relative to other magic items. The rarities are shown in the Magic Item Rarities and Values table. Common magic items, such as a Potion of Healing, are the most plentiful. Artifacts, such as the Wand of Orcus, are priceless, unique, and difficult to acquire. -\_ \_ Macic Item Rutes Rules for identifying, attuning to, and using magic items appear in the Player's Handbook, Additional rules are presented below. Attunement Prerequisites, ` a`{=tex} magic item has a class prerequisite, a creature must be a member of that class to attune to the item, Ifa creature must be a spellcaster to attune to an item, the creature qualifies if it can cast at least one spell using its traits or features, not by using a magic itern or the like. Items Made for Specific Creatures. Magic items that are meant to be worn tend to magically ad- just themselves to the wearer. However, you can decide that a magic item doesn't adjust its size to fit any wearer. For example, a particular armorer might make items usable only by folk who are sized and shaped like dwarves, Unusual Anatomy, Use your discretion to de- cide whether a creature can wear an item not made for its anatomy, A ring placed on a tentacle might work, but a yean-ti with @ snakelike tail ine stead of legs can't wear magic boots, Paired Items, You can allow exceptions to the rule that paired items must both be worn. For example, a character with only one arm might be able to use a single Glove of Missile Snaring so long as the matching glove \|s on their person, \~ = Macic ITEM VALUES BY RARITY Common magic items can often be bought ina town or city. Uncommon and Rare magic items are usually found only in cities, and rarer magic items might be sold only in wondrous locations, such as the City of Brass or Sigil. If you allow characters to buy and sell magic items in your campaign, rarity can help you set prices for those items. Gold Piece values are provided in the Magic Item Rarities and Values table, though a seller might ask for a service rather than coin as payment. Ifa magic item incorporates an item that has a purchase cost in the Player's Handbook (such as a weapon or a suit of armor), add that item's cost to the magic item's value. For example, +! Armor (Plate Armor) has a value of 5,500 GP, which is the sum of a Rare magic item's value (4,000 GP) and the cost of Plate Armor (1,500 GP). Macic Irem Rarities AND VALUES Rarity Value\* --- 'Rarity Value\* Common WOGP Very Rare 40,000 GP Uncommon 400GP Legendary 200,000 GP Rare AQOOGP Artifact Priceless \*Halve the value for a consumable item other than a Spell Scroll. The value of a Spel Scroi! is dauble what it costs to scribe the scroll {as specified in the Player's Handbook}, # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 217 ( MAGICITEMTRACKER ee. LEVELS I- 4 RARITIES: 7-20. TEMS: cue oe eae, f 6 COMMON "OOO0000 4UNCOMMON OOOO # 1 Rare O TEV ELS Sal "OO000. 19COMMON = DOQ00 OOO00O 17 UNCOMMON QOOQOOOO OO0O0O0 6 RARE OO0O00O # 1 Very Rare O LEVELS 11-16 RARITIES ITEMS" # 3 Common Ooo 7 UNCOMMON QOQQOQOQOOO a OOO00O # 11 Rare 00000 E 7VERYRARE COQOOQOOOOO i 2 LEGENDARY OO og LEVELS 17-20, RARITIES core gE MS ox ohn cy eee # 5 Rare Oo00o0o 1\] VERY RARE OO0000; OO0O0O # 9 Legendary Else 2102 Ooo Macic Item Toots Item Category --- Required Tool Armor Leatherworker's Tools, Smith's Tools, or Weaver's Tools depending on the kind of armor as noted in the tools' descriptions Potion Aichemist's Supplies or Herbalism Kit Ring Jeweler's Tools Rod Woodcarver's Tools Scroll Calligrapher's Supplies Staff Woodcarver's Tools Wand Woodcarver's Tools Weapon Leatherworker's Tools, Smith's Tools, or Woodcarver's Tools de- pending on the kind of weapon as noted in the tools' descriptions Wondrous Iter ---Tinker's Tools or the tool required to make the nonmagical item on which the magic item is based SPELLS If a magic item allows its user to cast any spells from it, you must have all those spells prepared ew ery day you spend crafting the item. TIME AND Cost Crafting a magic item takes an amount of time and money based on the item's rarity as shown in the Magic Item Crafting Time and Cost table, Work per Day. For each day of crafting, you must work for 8 hours. If an item requires multiple days, those days needn't be consecutive. Assistants. Characters can combine their efforts to shorten the crafting time, Divide the time needed to create an item by the number of characters work- ing on it. Normally, only one other character can assist you, but the DM might allow more assistants, Raw Materials, The cost in the table represents the raw materials needed to make a magic item. The DM determines whether appropriate raw materials are available. In a city, there is a 75 percent chance that the materials are available, and in any other settlement, that chance is 25 percent, If materials aren't available, you must wait at least 7 days before checking on the availability again. If a magic item incorporates an item that has a purchase cost (such as a weapon or a suit of armor), you must also pay that entire cost or craft that item using the rules in the Player's Handbook. For exam- ple, to make +! Armor (Plate Armor), you must pay 5,500 GP or pay 2,000 GP and craft the armor. Macic Item Crartinc Time AND Cost ttem Rarity Time\* Cost\* Common 5 days 50 GP Uncommon 10 days 200 GP Rare 50 days 2,000 GP Very Rare 125 days 20,000 GP Legendary 250 days # 100,000 Gp \*The time and cost are halved for 4 consurnable item other than a roll, whase crafting time and cost are given in the Player's nk History Prophecy. The item features in a prophecy: its bearer is destined to play a key role in future events. Religious. This item was used in religious ceremonies dedicated to a particular deity. It has religious symbols worked into it. Sinister, This item is linked to « deed of great evil, such as a massacre or an assas- sination. It might have a name or be closely associated with a villain who used it. Symbol of Power. This item was once used as part of royal regalia or as a badge of high office, Macic Item's Minor Property 1d20 12 5-6 7-8 10 W-12 Minor Property Beacon. You can take a Bonus Action to cause the item to shed Bright Light in a 10- foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet, or to extinguish the light. Compass. You can take a Magic action to learn which way is magnetic north. Nothing happens if this property is used in a loca- tion that has no magnetic north. Delver, While underground, you always. know the item's depth below the surface and the direction to the nearest staircase, ramp, or other path leading upward. Guardian. The item warns you, granting a +2 bonus to your Initiative rolls if you don't have the Incapacitated condition, Harmonious. Attuning to this iterm takes only 7 minute. Key, The \|tem is used to unlock a container, chamber, vault, or door. Secret Message. A message Is hidden somewhere on the item, It might be visible only at a certain time, under the light of one phase of the moon, or in a specific location, Sentinel. The DM chooses a kind of crea- ture, such as mind flayers or trolls, This item glows faintly when such creatures are within 120 feet of it. 1d20 B 4-15 16 Vv 1B 19 20 Minor Property Songcraft. Whenever this item is struck or is used to strike a foe, you hear a fragment of an ancient song, Strange Material. The item was created from @ material that is bizarre given its pur- pose. Its durability is unaffected. 'Temperate. You are unharmed by tempera- tures of O degrees Fahrenheit or lower, and 100 degrees Fahrenheit or higher. Unbreakable. The item can't be broken. Special means must be used to destroy it. War Leader, You can take a Magic action to cause your voice or signal to carry clearly for up to 600 feet until the end of your next turn. Waterborne. This item floats on water and other liquids. You have Advantage on Strength (Athletics) checks to swim. Roll twice, rerolling any additional 20s. Macic Item's Quirk 1d8 1 Quirk Blissful. You feel fortunate and optimistic about what the future holds, Butterflies and other harmless creatures might frolic in the item's presence. Confident. The item helps you fee! self-assured, Covetous. You become obsessed with mate- rial wealth. Fragile. The iter crumbles, frays, chips, or cracks slightly when wielded, worn, or activated, This quirk has no effect on its properties. Loud. The item makes 2 foud noise---such asa clang, a shout, or a resonating gong--- when used. Metamorphic, The item periodically alters its appearance In slight ways. You have no control over these minor alterations, which have no effect on the item's use. Painful, You experience a harmless flash of pain when using the item, Repulsive. You fee! a sense of distaste when in contact with the item and continue to ex- perience discomfort while bearing it,