# CHAPTER \| TREASURE 283 An orb is an etched crystal globe about 10 inches in diameter. When used, it grows to about 20 inches in diameter, and mist swirls inside it. While attuned to an orb, you can take a Magic action to peer into the orb's depths. You must then make a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a success- ful save, you control the orb for as long as you re- main attuned to it. On a failed save, the orb imposes the Charmed condition on you for as long as you remain attuned to it. While you are Charmed by the orb, you can't voluntarily end your Attunement to it, and the orb casts Suggestion on you at will (save DC 18), urging you to work toward the evil ends it desires. The dragon essence within the orb might want many things: the annihilation of a particular society or organization, freedom from the orb, to spread suffering in the world, to advance the worship of Tia- mat, or something else the DM decides. Random Properties. An Orb of Dragonkind has the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - 2 minor beneficial properties - I minor detrimental property - 1 major detrimental property Spells. The orb has 7 charges and regains 1d4 +3 expended charges daily at dawn. If you control the orb, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Cure Wounds (level 9 version) 4 Daylight 1 Death Ward 2 Detect Magic 0 Serying (save DC 18) 3 Call Dragons. While you control the orb, you can take a Magic action to cause the orb to issue a telepathic call that extends in all directions for 40 miles. Chromatic dragons in range feel compelled to come to the orb as soon as possible by the most direct route. Dragon deities such as Tiamat are un- affected by this call. Chromatic dragons drawn to the orb might be Hostile toward you for compelling them against their will. Once you have used this property, it can't be used again for 1 hour. Destroying an Orb. An Orb of Dragonkind has AC 20 and is destroyed if it takes damage from a +3 Weapon or a Disintegrate spell. Nothing else can harm it. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE ORB OF TIME Wondrous Item, Common This orb can be used as an Arcane Focus. While holding the orb, you can take a Magic ac- tion to determine whether it is morning, afternoon, evening, or nighttime. This property functions only on the Material Plane. PEARL OF POWER Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) While this pearl is on your person, you can take a Magic action to regain one expended spell slot of level 3 or lower. Once you use the pearl, it can't be used again until the next dawn. PERFUME OF BEWITCHING Wondrous Item, Common This tiny vial contains magic perfume, enough for one use. You can take a Magic action to apply the perfume to yourself, and its effect lasts 1 hour. For the duration, you have Advantage on all Charisma (Deception and Persuasion) checks made to influ- ence a creature within 5 feet of yourself. PERIAPT OF HEALTH Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this pendant, you can take a Magic action to regain 2d4 + 2 Hit Points. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. In addition, you have Advantage on saving throws to avoid or end the Poisoned condition while you wear this pendant. PERIAPT OF PROOF AGAINST POISON Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) This delicate silver chain has a brilliant-cut black gem pendant. While you wear it, you have Immu- nity to the Poisoned condition and Poison damage. PERIAPT OF WOUND CLOSURE Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this pendant, you gain the following benefits. Life Preservation. Whenever you make a Death Saving Throw, you can change a roll of 9 or lower to a 10, turning a failed save into a successful one. # Periapt Of MEALTH Natural Healing Boost. Whenever you roll a Hit Point Die to regain Hit Points, double the number of Hit Points it restores. PHILTER OF LOVE Potion, Uncommon The next time you see a creature within 10 minutes after drinking this philter, you are charmed by that creature and have the Charmed condition for 1 hour. This rose-hued, effervescent liquid contains one easy-to-miss bubble shaped like a heart. PIPE OF SMOKE MONSTERS Wondrous Item, Common While smoking this pipe, you can take a Magic ac- tion to exhale a puff of smoke that takes the form of a creature, such as a dragon, a flumph, or a slaad. The form must be small enough to fit in a I-foot cube and loses its shape after a few seconds, becom- ing an ordinary puff of smoke. PIPES OF HAUNTING Wondrous Item, Uncommon These pipes have 3 charges and regain 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. You can take a Magic action to play them and expend 1 charge to create an eerie, spellbinding tune. Each creature of your choice within 30 feet of you must succeed on a DC 15 Wis- dom saving throw or have the Frightened condition for 1 minute. A creature that fails the save repeats Periaer or Wouno Ciosure Pipe or SMOKE Monsrers Pipes oF MAUNTING Pipes oF THE Sewers it at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. A creature that succeeds on Re, its save is immune to the effect of these pipes for 24. hours. C + = PIPES OF THE SEWERS Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While these pipes are on your person, ordinary rats and giant rats are Indifferent toward you and won't attack you unless you threaten or harm them. The pipes have 3 charges and regain 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. If you play the pipes as a Magic action, you can take a Bonus Action to ex- pend I to 3 charges, calling forth one Swarm of Rats with each expended charge if enough rats are within half a mile of you to be called in this fashion (as determined by the DM). If there aren't enough rats to form a swarm, the charge is wasted. Called swarms move toward the music by the short- est available route but aren't under your control otherwise. Whenever a Swarm of Rats that isn't under an- other creature's control comes within 30 feet of you while you are playing the pipes, the swarm makes a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw. On a successful save, the swarm behaves as it normally would and can't be swayed by the pipes' music for the next 24 # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 285 Portion oF Ciumeaine Prare ARMOR OF # Ethereal Ness Po.e or COLLAPsinG 286 hours. On a failed save, the swarm is swayed by the pipes' music and becomes Friendly to you and your allies for as long as you continue to play the pipes each round as a Magic action. A Friendly swarm obeys your commands. If you issue no commands to a Friendly swarm, it defends itself but otherwise takes no actions. If a Friendly swarm starts its turn more than 30 feet away from you, your control over that swarm ends, and the swarm behaves as it normally would and can't be swayed by the pipes' music for the next 24 hours. # Plate Armor Of Etherealness Armor (Half Plate Armor or Plate Armor), Legendary (Requires Attunement) While you're wearing this armor, you can take a Magic action and use a command word to gain the effect of the Etherealness spell. The spell ends imme- diately if you remove the armor or take a Magic ac- tion to repeat the command word. This property of the armor can't be used again until the next dawn. POLE OF ANGLING Wondrous Item, Common This item functions as a Pole. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to cause it to transform into a fishing pole with a hook, a line, and a reel, or have the fishing pole revert to a Pole. POLE OF COLLAPSING Wondrous Item, Common This item functions as a Pole. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to collapse it into a 1-foot-long rod for ease of storage (the pole's weight doesn't change) or cause the 1-foot-long rod to re- vert to a Pole. The rod elongates only as far as the surrounding space allows. PORTABLE HOLE Wondrous Item, Rare This fine black cloth, soft as silk, is folded up to the dimensions of a handkerchief. It unfolds into a cir- cular sheet 6 feet in diameter. You can take a Magic action to unfold a Porta- ble Hole and place it on or against a solid surface, whereupon the Portable Hole creates an extradi- mensional hole 10 feet deep. The cylindrical space within the hole exists on a different plane of exis- tence, so it can't be used to create open passages. Any creature inside an open Portable Hole can exit the hole by climbing out of it. You can take a Magic action to close a Portable Hole by taking hold of the edges of the cloth and folding it up. Folding the cloth closes the hole, and any creatures or objects within remain in the ex- tradimensional space. No matter what's in it, the hole weighs next to nothing. If the hole is folded up, a creature within the hole's extradimensional space can take an action to make a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check. On a successful check, the creature forces its way out and appears within 5 feet of the Portable Hole. A closed Portable Hole holds enough air for 1 hour of breathing, di- vided by the number of breathing creatures inside. Placing a Portable Hole inside an extradimensional space created by a Bag of Holding, Heward's Handy Haversack, or similar item instantly destroys both items and opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate originates where the one item was placed inside the other. Any creature within 10 feet of the gate and not behind Total Cover is sucked through it and deposited in a random location on the Astral Plane. The gate then closes. The gate is one-way only and can't be reopened. POTION OF ANIMAL FRIENDSHIP Potion, Uncommon When you drink this potion, you can cast the level 3 version of the Animal Friendship spell (save DC 13). Agitating this potion's muddy liquid brings little bits into view: a fish scale, a hummingbird feather, a cat claw, or a squirrel hair. POTION OF CLAIRVOYANCE Potion, Rare When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of the Clairvoyance spell (no Concentration required). An eyeball bobs in this potion's yellowish liquid but vanishes when the potion is opened. ---------*---*---\_------ - \$s how POTION OF CLIMBING Potion, Common When you drink this potion, you gain a Climb Speed equal to your Speed for 1 hour. During this time, you have Advantage on Strength (Athletics) checks to climb. This potion is separated into brown, silver, and gray layers resembling bands of stone. Shaking the bottle fails to mix the colors. ae POTION OF COMPREHENSION Potion, Common When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of the Comprehend Languages spell for 1 hour. This potion's liquid is a clear concoction with bits of salt and soot swirling in it. po --- \_ POTION OF DIMINUTION Potion, Rare When you drink this potion, you gain the "reduce" effect of the Enlarge/Reduce spell for 1d4 hours (no Concentration required). The red in the potion's liquid continuously con- tracts to a tiny bead and then expands to color the clear liquid around it. Shaking the bottle fails to interrupt this process. POTION OF FIRE BREATH Potion, Uncommon After drinking this potion, you can take a Bonus Action to exhale fire at a target within 30 feet of yourself. The target makes a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4d6 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. The effect ends after you exhale the fire three times or when 1 hour has passed. This potion's orange liquid flickers, and smoke fills the top of the container and wafts out whenever it is opened. POTION OF FLYING Potion, Very Rare When you drink this potion, you gain a Fly Speed equal to your Speed for 1 hour and can hover. If you're in the air when the potion wears off, you fall unless you have some other means of staying aloft. This potion's clear liquid floats at the top of its container and has cloudy white impurities drifting in it. oS a --- POTION OF GASEOUS FORM Potion, Rare When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of the Gaseous Form spell for 1 hour (no Concentration required) or until you end the effect as a Bonus Action. This potion's container seems to hold fog that moves and pours like water. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE: ne A EE RG + } nk pe oe 287 is a POTION OF GIANT STRENGTH Potion, Rarity Varies When you drink this potion, your Strength score changes for 1 hour. The type of giant determines the score (see the table below). The potion has no effect on you if your Strength is equal to or greater than that score. This potion's transparent liquid has floating in it a sliver of light resembling a giant's fingernail. Potion Str. Rarity Potion of Giant Strength (hill) 21 Uncommon Potion of Giant Strength (frost 23 Rare or stone) Potion of Giant Strength (fire) 25 Rare Potion of Giant Strength (cloud) 27 Very Rare Potion of Giant Strength (storm) 29 Legendary ee ee \<S POTION OF GREATER INVISIBILITY Potion, Very Rare This potion's container looks empty but feels as though it holds liquid. When you drink the potion, you have the Invisible condition for 1 hour. ary --- POTION OF GROWTH Potion, Uncommon When you drink this potion, you gain the "enlarge" effect of the Enlarge/Reduce speil for 10 minutes (no Concentration required). The red in the potion's liquid continuously ex- pands from a tiny bead to color the clear liquid around it and then contracts. Shaking the bottle fails to interrupt this process. = ------ POTIONS OF HEALING Potion, Rarity Varies You regain Hit Points when you drink this potion. The number of Hit Points depends on the potion's rarity, as shown in the table below. Whatever its potency, the potion's red liquid glim- mers when agitated. a POTION OF HEROISM Potion, Rare When you drink this potion, you gain 10 Temporary Hit Points that last for 1 hour. For the same dura- tion, you are under the effect of the Bless spell (no Concentration required). This potion's blue liquid bubbles and steams as if boiling. - ---\~--- POTION OF INVISIBILITY Potion, Rare This potion's container looks empty but feels as though it holds liquid. When you drink the potion, you have the Invisible condition for 1 hour. The effect ends early if you make an attack roll, deal damage, or cast a spell. POTION OF INVULNERABILITY Potion, Rare For 1 minute after you drink this potion, you have Resistance to all damage. This potion's syrupy liquid looks like liquefied iron. F - ager POTION OF LONGEVITY Potion, Very Rare When you drink this potion, your physical age is reduced by Id6 + 6 years, to a minimum of 13 years. Each time you subsequently drink a Potion of Lon- gevity, there is 10 percent cumulative chance that you instead age by 1d6 + 6 years. Suspended in this amber liquid is a tiny heart that, against all reason, is still beating. These ingredients vanish when the potion is opened. 2 a POTION OF MIND READING Potion, Rare When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of the Detect Thoughts spell (save DC 13) for 10 minutes (no Concentration required). This potion's dense, purple liquid has an ovoid cloud of pink floating in it. Potion HP Regained Rarity Potion of Healing 2d4+2 Common Ee --- Potion of Healing 4d4+4 Uncommon POTION OF POISON (greater) Potion, Uncommon Potion of Healing 8d4+8 Rare This concoction looks, smells, and tastes like a (superior) Potion of Healing or another beneficial potion. Potion of Healing 10d4+20 'Very Rare (supreme) CHAPTER7 \| TREASURE a ae ------ i eonld -\~v £ b ee \> ee ON aa e 4 » ee ae wf Porion oF MEALING Porion W or GIANT SrRENGTM (Storm) However, it is actually poison masked by illusion magic. Identify reveals its true nature. If you drink this potion, you take 4d6 Poison damage and must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 1 hour. POTION OF PUGILISM Potion, Uncommon After you drink this potion, each Unarmed Strike you make deals an extra 1d6 Force damage on a hit. This effect lasts 10 minutes. This potion is a thick green fluid that tastes like spinach. POTION OF RESISTANCE Potion, Uncommon When you drink this potion, you have Resistance to one type of damage for 1 hour. The DM chooses the type or determines it randomly by rolling on the following table. 1d10 Damage Type 1d10 Damage Type 1 Acid 6 Necrotic 2 Cold 7 Poison 3 'Fire 8 Psychic 4 Force 9 Radiant 5 Lightning 10 Thunder Porion oF Invisiaiciry Porion oF PuGicism POTION OF SPEED Potion, Very Rare When you drink this potion, you gain the effect of the Haste spell for 1 minute (no Concentration re- quired) without suffering the wave of lethargy that typically occurs when the effect ends. This potion's yellow fluid is streaked with black and swirls on its own. POTION OF VITALITY Potion, Very Rare When you drink this potion, it removes any Exhaustion levels you have and ends the Poisoned condition on you. For the next 24 hours, you regain the maximum number of Hit Points for any Hit Point Die you spend. This potion's crimson liquid regularly pulses with dull light, calling to mind a heartbeat. POTION OF WATER BREATHING Potion, Uncommon You can breathe underwater for 24 hours after drinking this potion. This potion's cloudy green fluid smells of the sea and has a jellyfish-like bubble floating in it. Pot OF AWAKENING Wondrous Item, Common If you plant an ordinary shrub in this 10-pound clay pot and let it grow for 30 days, the shrub magically transforms into an Awakened Shrub at the end of # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Porion oF Virauiry --- that time. When the shrub awakens, its roots break the pot, destroying it. The awakened shrub is Friendly toward you and obeys your commands. Absent commands from you, it does nothing. PROSTHETIC LIMB Wondrous Item, Common This magic item replaces a lost limb---a hand, an arm, a foot, a leg, or a similar body part. While the prosthetic is attached, it functions identically to the part it replaces. You can detach or reattach it as a Magic action, and it can't be removed against your will while you are alive. QUAAL'S FEATHER TOKEN Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies This object looks like a feather. Different types of feather tokens exist, each with a different single-use effect. The DM chooses the kind of token or deter- mines it randomly by rolling on the Quaal's Feather Tokens table. The type of token determines its rarity. Anchor (Uncommon). You can take a Magic action to touch the token to a boat or ship. For the next 24 hours, the vessel can't be moved by any means. Touching the token to the vessel again ends the ef- fect. When the effect ends, the token disappears. Bird (Rare). You can take a Magic action to toss the token 5 feet into the air. The token disappears Quaar's Fearner Toxen (Wrip) rt and an enormous, multicolored bird takes its place. The bird has the statistics of a Roc, but it can't at- tack. It obeys your simple commands and can carry up to 500 pounds while flying at its maximum speed (16 miles per hour for a maximum of 144 miles per day, with a l-hour rest for every 3 hours of flying) or 1,000 pounds at half that speed. The bird disappears after flying its maximum distance for a day or if it drops to 0 Hit Points. You can dismiss the bird as a Magic action. Fan (Uncommon). If you are on a boat or ship, you can take a Magic action to toss the token up to 10 feet in the air. The token disappears, and a giant flapping fan takes its place. The fan floats and cre- ates a strong wind. This wind can fill the sails of one ship, increasing its speed by 5 miles per hour for 8 hours. You can dismiss the fan as a Magic action. Swan Boat (Rare). You can take a Magic action to touch the token to a body of water at least 60 feet in diameter. The token disappears, and a 50-foot-long, 20-foot-wide boat shaped like a swan takes its place. The boat is self-propelled and moves across water at a speed of 6 miles per hour. You can take a Magic action while on the boat to command it to move or to turn up to 90 degrees. The boat remains for 24 hours and then disappears. You can dismiss the boat as a Magic action. Tree (Uncommon). You must be outdoors to use this token. You can take a Magic action to touch it to an unoccupied space on the ground. The token disappears, and in its place a nonmagical oak tree springs into existence. The tree is 60 feet tall and has a 5-foot-diameter trunk, and its branches at the top spread out in a 20-foot radius. Quaac's Fearne Toxen (Biro) s" Porion fi or Warer 7 BreatHing ay, « Featwer TOKEN (ANcHoR) CHAPTER \| TREASURE Whip (Rare). You can take a Magic action to throw the token to a point within 10 feet of yourself. The token disappears, and a floating whip takes its place. You can then take a Bonus Action to make a melee spell attack against a creature within 10 feet of the whip, with an attack bonus of +9. On a hit, the tar- get takes 1d6 + 5 Force damage. As a Bonus Action, you can direct the whip to fly up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a crea- ture within 10 feet of the whip. The whip disappears after 1 hour, when you take a Magic action to dis- miss it, or when you die or have the Incapacitated condition, QUAAL's FEATHER TOKENS 1d100 Token Rarity 01-20 Anchor Uncommon 21-35 Bird Rare 36-50 Fan Uncommon 51-65 Swanboat Rare 66-90 Tree Uncommon 91-00 Whip Rare QUARTERSTAFF OF THE ACROBAT Weapon (Quarterstaff), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) You have a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. While holding this weapon, you can cause it to emit green Dim Light out to 10 feet, either as a Bo- nus Action or after you roll Initiative, or you can extinguish the light as a Bonus Action. While holding this weapon, you can take a Bonus Action to alter its form, turning it into a 6-inch rod (for ease of storage) or a 10-foot pole, or reverting it Quaau's Fearwer TOKEN (Fan) Quaar's Featrer Toxen (Tree) a Quarterstaff; the weapon will elongate only as far as the surrounding space allows. In certain forms, the weapon has the following additional properties. Acrobatic Assist (Quarterstaff or 10-Foot Pole Forms Only). While holding this weapon, you have Advantage on Dexterity (Acrobatics) checks. Attack Deflection (Quarterstaff Form Only). When you are hit by an attack while holding the weapon, you can take a Reaction to twirl the weapon around you, gaining a +5 bonus to your Armor Class against the triggering attack, potentially causing the attack to miss you. You can't use this property again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. Ranged Weapon (Quarterstaff Form Only). This weapon has the Thrown property with a normal range of 30 feet and a long range of 120 feet. Im- mediately after you make a ranged attack with the weapon, it flies back to your hand. QUIVER OF EHLONNA Wondrous Item, Uncommon Each of the quiver's three compartments connects to an extradimensional space that allows the quiver to hold numerous items while never weighing more than 2 pounds. The shortest compartment can hold up to 60 Arrows, Bolts, or similar objects. The mid- size compartment holds up to 18 Javelins or similar objects. The longest compartment holds up to 6 long objects, such as bows, Quarterstaffs, or Spears. You can draw any item the quiver contains as if doing so from a regular quiver or scabbard. Quiver or EWLONNA Quarrersrarr oF twe AcrosaTr # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 291 RING OF ANIMAL INFLUENCE RING OF ANIMAL INFLUENCE Ring, Rare This ring has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you can expend 1 charge to cast one of the following spells (save DC 13) from it: - Animal Friendship - Fear (affects Beasts only) - Speak with Animals RinG OF DjJINNI SUMMONING Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you can take a Magic action to summon a particular Djinni from the Ele- mental Plane of Air. The djinni appears in an unoc- cupied space you choose within 120 feet of yourself. It remains as long as you maintain Concentration, to a maximum of 1 hour, or until it drops to O Hit Points. While summoned, the djinni is Friendly to you and your allies, and it obeys your commands. If you fail to command it, the djinni defends itself against attackers but takes no other actions. After the djinni departs, it can't be summoned again for 24 hours, and the ring becomes nonmagi- cal if the djinni dies. Rings of Djinni Summoning are often created by the djinn they summon and given to mortals as gifts of friendship or tokens of esteem. RING OF ELEMENTAL COMMAND Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement) Each Ring of Elemental Command is linked to one of the four Elemental Planes. The DM chooses or ran- domly determines the linked plane. For example, a Ring of Elemental Command (air) is linked to the Ele- mental Plane of Air. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 2 res ne RinG oF Dunn SUMMONING RING OF ELEMENTAL Commano (Air) Every Ring of Elemental Command has the follow- ing two properties: Elemental Bane. While wearing the ring, you have Advantage on attack rolls against Elementals and they have Disadvantage on attack rolls against you. Elemental Compulsion. While wearing the ring, you can take a Magic action to try to compel an Elemental you see within 60 feet of yourself. The Elemental makes a DC 18 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the Elemental has the Charmed condition until the start your next turn, and you determine what it does with its move and action on its next turn. Elemental Focus. While wearing the ring, you benefit from additional properties corresponding to the ring's linked Elemental Plane: Air. You know Auran, you have Resistance to Light- ning damage, and you have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed and can hover. Earth. You know Terran, and you have Resistance to Acid damage. Terrain composed of rubble, rocks, or dirt isn't Difficult Terrain for you. In ad- dition, you can move through solid earth or rock as if those areas were Difficult Terrain without disturbing the matter through which you pass. If you end your turn in solid earth or rock, you are shunted out to the nearest unoccupied space you last occupied. Fire. You know Ignan, and you have Immunity to Fire damage. Water. You know Aquan, you gain a Swim Speed of 60 feet, and you can breathe underwater. Spellcasting. The ring has 5 charges and regains 1d4 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you can cast a spell from it. Choose the spell from the list of available spells based on the Elemental Plane the ring is linked to, as shown in the following table. The table indicates RinG or Evasion RING or Fearwer FALLING how many charges you must expend to cast the spell, which has a save DC of 18. Plane Spells (Charges) Air Chain Lightning (3 charges), Feather Fall (0 charges), Gust of Wind (2 charges), Wind Wall (1 charge) Earth Earthquake (5 charges), Stone Shape (2 charges), Stoneskin (3 charges), Wall of Stone (3 charges) Fire Burning Hands (1 charge), Fireball (2 charges), Fire Storm (4 charges), Wall of Fire (3 charges) Water Create or Destroy Water (1 charge), Ice Storm (2 charges), Tsunami (5 charges), Wall of Ice (3 charges), Water Walk (2 charges) RING OF EVASION Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) This ring has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. When you fail a Dexterity saving throw while wearing the ring, you can take a Reaction to expend 1 charge to succeed on that save instead. RING OF FEATHER FALLING Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) When you fall while wearing this ring, you descend 60 feet per round and take no damage from falling. RING oF InvisipiLity RING oF Mino SHIELOING RING OF FREE ACTION Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) While you wear this ring, Difficult Terrain doesn't cost you extra movement. In addition, magic can neither reduce any of your Speeds nor cause you to have the Paralyzed or Restrained condition. RING OF INVISIBILITY Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you can take a Magic ac- tion to give yourself the Invisible condition. You re- main Invisible until the ring is removed or until you take a Bonus Action to become visible again. RING OF JUMPING Ring, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you can cast Jump from it, but can target only yourself when you do so. RING OF MIND SHIELDING Ring, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you are immune to magic that allows other creatures to read your thoughts, determine whether you are lying, know your align- ment, or know your creature type. Creatures can telepathically communicate with you only if you allow it. You can take a Magic action to cause the ring to become imperceptible until you take another Magic action to make it perceptible, until you remove the ring, or until you die. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE RING OF PROTECTION e RING OF REGENERATION If you die while wearing the ring, your soul enters it, unless it already houses a soul. You can remain in the ring or depart for the afterlife. As long as your soul is in the ring, you can telepathically commu- nicate with any creature wearing it. A wearer can't prevent this telepathic communication. RING OF PROTECTION Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class and saving throws while wearing this ring. RING OF REGENERATION Ring, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you regain 1d6 Hit Points every 10 minutes if you have at least 1 Hit Point. If you lose a body part, the ring causes the missing part to regrow and return to full functionality after 1d6 + 1 days if you have at least 1 Hit Point the whole time. # Ring Of Resistance Ring, Rare You have Resistance to one damage type while wearing this ring. The gemstone in the ring indi- cates the type, which the DM chooses or determines randomly by rolling on the following table. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE # Ring Of RING OF SHOOTING Stars 1d10 Damage Type Gemstone 1 Acid Pearl 2 Cold Tourmaline 3 'Fire Garnet 4 Force Sapphire 5 Lightning Citrine 6 Necrotic Jet 7 Poison Amethyst 8 = Psychic Jade 9 Radiant Topaz 10 Thunder Spinel RING OF SHOOTING STARS Ring, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) You can cast Dancing Lights or Light from the ring. The ring has 6 charges and regains 1d6 expended charges daily at dawn. You can expend its charges to use the properties below. Faerie Fire. You can expend 1 charge to cast Faerie Fire from the ring. Lightning Spheres. You can expend 2 charges as a Magic action to create up to four 3-foot-diameter spheres of lightning. Each sphere appears in an unoccupied space you can see within 120 feet of yourself. The spheres last as long as you maintain Concentration, up to 1 minute. Each sphere sheds Dim Light in a 30-foot radius, As a Bonus Action, you can move each sphere up to 30 feet, but no farther than 120 feet away from yourself. The first time the sphere comes within 5 feet of a creature other than you that isn't behind RING oF RING oF Speéti SrorRine Total Cover, the sphere discharges lightning at that creature and disappears. That creature makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes Lightning damage based on the num- ber of spheres you created, as shown in the follow- ing table. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage. Number of Lightning Number of Lightning Spheres Damage Spheres Damage 1 4d12 3 2d6 2 5d4 4 2d4 Shooting Stars. You can expend \| to 3 charges as a Magic action. For every charge you expend, you launch a glowing mote of light from the ring at a point you can see within 60 feet of yourself. Each creature in a 15-foot Cube originating from that point is showered in sparks and makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d4 Radiant damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a suc- cessful one. RING OF SPELL STORING Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) This ring stores spells cast into it, holding them un- til the attuned wearer uses them. The ring can store up to 5 levels worth of spells at a time. When found, it contains 1d6 - 1 levels of stored spells chosen by the DM. Any creature can cast a spell of level 1 through 5 into the ring by touching the ring as the spell is cast. The spell has no effect other than to be stored in the ring. If the ring can't hold the spell, the spell is TELEKINESIS RING OF Sree TuRNING expended without effect. The level of the slot used to cast the spell determines how much space it uses. While wearing this ring, you can cast any spell stored in it. The spell uses the slot level, spell save DC, spell attack bonus, and spellcasting ability of the original caster but is otherwise treated as if you cast the spell. The spell cast from the ring is no lon- ger stored in it, freeing up space. RING OF SPELL TURNING Ring, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you have Advantage on saving throws against spells. If you succeed on the save for a spell of level 7 or lower, the spell has no effect on you. If that spell targeted only you and didn't create an area of effect, you can take a Reac- tion to deflect the spell back at the spell's caster; the caster must make a saving throw against the spell using their own spell save DC. RING OF SWIMMING Ring, Uncommon You have a Swim Speed of 40 feet while wearing this ring. RING OF TELEKINESIS Ring, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you can cast Telekinesis from it. i an rr a al # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 295 296 RING oF THE Ram RING OF Warery RING OF THE RAM Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) This ring has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the ring, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 to 3 charges to make a ranged spell attack against one creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The ring produces a spectral ram's head and makes its attack roll with a +7 bonus. On a hit, for each charge you spend, the target takes 2d10 Force damage and is pushed 5 feet away from you. Alternatively, you can expend \| to 3 of the ring's charges as a Magic action to try to break a nonmag- ical object you can see within 60 feet of yourself that isn't being worn or carried. The ring makes a Strength check with a +5 bonus for each charge you spend. RING OF THREE WISHES Ring, Legendary While wearing this ring, you can expend 1 of its 3 charges to cast Wish from it. The ring becomes non- magical when you use the last charge. RING OF WARMTH Ring, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) If you take Cold damage while wearing this ring, the ring reduces the damage you take by 2d8. In addition, while wearing this ring, you and everything you wear and carry are unharmed by temperatures of 0 degrees Fahrenheit or lower. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE RING OF Warer WALKING RING oF Tree Wiswes RING OF WATER WALKING Ring, Uncommon While wearing this ring, you cast Water Walk from it, targeting only yourself. RING OF X-RAY VISION Ring, Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this ring, you can take a Magic ac- tion to gain X-ray vision with a range of 30 feet for 1 minute. To you, solid objects within that radius ap- pear transparent and don't prevent light from pass- ing through them. The vision can penetrate 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, or up to 3 feet of wood or dirt. Thicker substances or a thin sheet of lead block the vision. Whenever you use the ring again before taking a Long Rest, you must succeed on a DC 15 Constitu- tion saving throw or gain 1 Exhaustion level. RIVAL COIN Wondrous Item, Common This gold coin has a creature embossed on each side. The two depicted creatures must be famous rivals or enemies of each other. For example, a Rival Coin might show Iggwilv on one side and Mordenkainen on the other, or Venger on one side and Tiamat on the other. One of these figures is on the "heads" side of the coin, the other on the "tails" side. The coin has \| charge and regains its expended charge daily at dawn. You can take a Magic action to toss the coin, expending its charge. Roll any die to determine whether the coin comes up heads (on an even number) or tails (on an odd number). The roll also determines the effect: Heads. Target one creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The target makes a DC 13 Wis- dom saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes 2d4 Psychic damage and has Disadvantage on the next attack roll it makes before the end of its next turn. On a successful save, the target takes half as much damage only. Tails. You take 1d4 Psychic damage. RoBE OF EYES Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) This robe is adorned with eyelike patterns. While you wear the robe, you gain the following benefits: All-Around Vision. The robe gives you Advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight. Special Senses. You have Darkvision and Truesight, both with a range of 120 feet. Drawbacks. A Light spell cast on the robe or a Day- light spell cast within 5 feet of the robe gives you the Blinded condition for 1 minute. At the end of each of your turns, you make a Constitution saving throw (DC 11 for Light or DC 15 for Daylight), ending the condition on yourself on a success. ROBE OF SCINTILLATING COLORS Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This robe has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While you wear it, you can take a Magic action and expend 1 charge to cause the garment to display a shifting pattern of dazzling hues until the end of your next turn. During this time, the robe sheds Bright Light in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet, and crea- tures that can see you have Disadvantage on attack rolls against you. Any creature in the Bright Light that can see you when the robe's power is activated must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or have the Stunned condition until the effect ends. ROBE OF STARS Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This black or dark-blue robe is embroidered with small white or silver stars. You gain a +1 bonus to saving throws while you wear it. Six stars, located on the robe's upper-front por- tion, are particularly large. While wearing this robe, you can take a Magic action to remove one of the stars and expend it to cast the level 5 version of Magic Missile. Daily at dusk, 1d6 removed stars reap- pear on the robe. While you wear the robe, you can take a Magic action to enter the Astral Plane along with RING oF X-ray Vision Rivac Coins # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 297 298 Rose or Srars everything you are wearing and carrying. You re- main there until you take a Magic action to return to the plane you were on. You reappear in the last space you occupied or, if that space is occupied, the nearest unoccupied space. # Robe Of The Archmagi Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) This elegant garment is made from exquisite cloth and adorned with runes. You gain these benefits while wearing the robe. Armor. If you aren't wearing armor, your base Armor Class is 15 plus your Dexterity modifier. Magic Resistance. You have Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. War Mage. Your spell save DC and spell attack bo- nus each increase by 2. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE we # Robe Of The. Archmagi. Rose or Userut Irems ROBE OF USEFUL ITEMS Wondrous Item, Uncommon This robe has cloth patches of various shapes and colors covering it. While wearing the robe, you can take a Magic action to detach one of the patches, causing it to become the object or creature it rep- resents. Once the last patch is removed, the robe becomes an ordinary garment. The robe has two of each of the following patches: - Bullseye Lantern (filled and lit) - Dagger - Mirror - Pole - Rope (coiled) - Sack In addition, the robe has 4d4 other patches. The DM chooses the patches or determines them randomly by rolling on the following table. Rov oF ABSORPTION 14100 Patch 01-08 Bag of 100 GP 09-15 Silver coffer (1 foot long, 6 inches wide and deep) worth 500 GP 16-22 Iron door (up to 10 feet wide and 10 feet high, barred on one side of your choice), which you can place in an opening you can reach; it conforms to fit the opening, attach- ing and hinging itself 23-30 10 gems worth 100 GP each 31-44 Wooden ladder (24 feet long) 45-51 Riding Horse with a Riding Saddle 52-59 Open pit (a 10-foot Cube), which you can place on the ground within 10 feet of yourself 60-68 4 Potions of Healing 69-75 Rowboat (12 feet long) 76-83 Spell Scroll containing one spell of level 1, 2, or 3 (your choice) 84-90 2 Mastiffs 91-96 Window (2 feet by 4 feet, up to 2 feet deep), which you can place on a vertical surface you can reach 97-00 Portable Ram Rop OF ABSORPTION Rod, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While holding this rod, you can take a Reaction to absorb a spell that is targeting only you and doesn't create an area of effect. The absorbed spell's effect is canceled, and the spell's energy---not the spell itself--- is stored in the rod. The energy has the same level as the spell when it was cast. A canceled spell dissi- pates with no effect, and any resources used to cast it are wasted. The rod can absorb and store up to 50 levels of energy over the course of its existence. Once the rod absorbs 50 levels of energy, it can't ab- sorb more. If you are targeted by a spell that the rod can't store, the rod has no effect on that spell. When you become attuned to the rod, you know how many levels of energy the rod has absorbed over the course of its existence and how many levels of spell energy it currently has stored. If you are a spellcaster holding the rod, you can convert energy stored in it into spell slots to cast spells you have prepared or know. You can create spell slots only of a level equal to or lower than your own spell slots, up to a maximum of level 5. You use the stored levels in place of your slots but otherwise cast the spell as normal. For example, you can use 3 levels stored in the rod as a level 3 spell slot. A newly found rod typically has 1d10 levels of spell energy stored in it. A rod that can no longer absorb spell energy and has no energy remaining becomes nonmagical. ROD OF ALERTNESS Rod, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This rod has the following properties. Alertness. While holding the rod, you have Advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks and on Initiative rolls. Spells. While holding the rod, you can cast the fol- lowing spells from it: - Detect Evil and Good - Detect Magic - Detect Poison and Disease - See Invisibility Protective Aura. As a Magic action, you can plant the haft end of the rod in the ground, whereupon the rod's head sheds Bright Light in a 60-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 60 feet. While in that Bright Light, you and your allies gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class and saving throws and can sense the location of any Invisible creature that is also in the Bright Light. The rod's head stops glowing and the effect ends after 10 minutes or when a creature takes a Magic action to pull the rod from the ground. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn.