# CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX tor ee ee eteaks sc Boasy ANo HANK BARELY AVOID A FUSILLADE OF POISONED DaRTs/ POISONED NEEDLE Nuisance Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature opens the trap's lock improperly or fails to disarm the trap Duration: Instantaneous A poisoned needle is hidden in a lock. When a crea- ture opens the lock with any object other than the proper key, the needle springs out and stabs the creature. The creature makes a DC 11 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 5 (1d10) Poison damage and has the Poisoned condi- tion for I hour. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage only. Avoid. The trap doesn't trigger if the lock is opened using a Knock spell or similar magic. Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature can examine the trapped lock and make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the needle on a successful check. Once the trap is detected, a character can take an action to try to disarm the trap, doing so with a successful DC 15 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. On a failed check, the crea- ture triggers the trap. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing the damage and the save DC, as shown in the following table. Levels Poison Damage Save DC 5-10 11 (2d10) 13 11-16 22 (4d10) 15 17-20 55 (10d10) 7 # Rolling Stone Deadly Trap (Levels 11-16) or Nuisance Trap (Levels 17-20) Trigger: A creature moves onto a pressure plate Duration: Until the stone stops rolling When a creature moves onto a hidden pressure plate, a 5-foot-radius orb of solid stone is released from a secret compartment and begins to roll. The stone and all creatures nearby roll Initiative; the stone gets a +8 bonus on its Initiative roll. On its turn, the stone moves 60 feet in one direc- tion, changing course if redirected by an obstacle. The stone can move through creatures' spaces, and creatures can move through the stone's space, treating it as Difficult Terrain. Whenever the stone enters a creature's space for the first time on a turn or a creature enters the stone's space while the stone is rolling, that creature must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 55 (10d10) Blud- geoning damage and have the Prone condition. The stone stops when it hits a wall or similar barrier. It can't go around corners, but creative dun- geon builders incorporate curving turns into nearby passages that allow the stone to keep moving. Detect and Disarm. As a Study action, a creature can examine the section of floor that forms the pressure plate and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Inves- tigation) check, deducing the pressure plate's func- tion on a successful check. Wedging an Iron Spike or a similar object under the pressure plate prevents the trap from triggering. Destroy the Stone. The stone is a Large object that has AC 17, HP 100, a Damage Threshold of 10, and Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage. Slow the Stone. As an action, a creature can try to slow down the stone with a DC 20 Strength (Ath- letics) check. If the check is successful, the distance the stone moves on its turn is reduced by 15 feet. If that distance drops to 0, it stops moving and is no longer a threat. SPIKED PIT Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature moves onto the pit's lid Duration: Instantaneous A 10-foot-deep pit has a hinged lid constructed from material identical to the surrounding floor. When a creature moves onto the lid, it swings open like a trapdoor, causing the creature to fall into the pit, which has sharpened wooden or metal spikes at the bottom. The lid remains open thereafter. A creature that falls into the pit lands at the bot- tom and takes 3 (1d6) Bludgeoning damage from the fall plus 9 (2d8) Piercing damage from the spikes. Detect and Disarm. As a Study action, a creature can examine the section of floor that forms the pit's lid and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check, detecting the pit on a successful check. Once the hidden pit is detected, an Iron Spike or a similar object can be wedged between the pit's lid and the surrounding floor to prevent the lid from opening, thereby making it safe to cross. The cover can also be held shut using an Arcane Lock spell or similar magic. Escape. A creature needs a Climb Speed, climbing gear, or magic such as a Spider Climb spell to scale the pit's smooth walls. You can make the pit easier to escape by adding cracks in the walls big enough to serve as handholds and footholds. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing the pit's depth and damage, as shown in the following table. Levels PitDepth Damage 5-10 30 feet 10 (3d6) Bludgeoning plus 13 (3d8) Piercing N-16 60 feet 21 (6d6) Bludgeoning plus 36 (8d8) Piercing 42 (12d6) Bludgeoning plus 57 (13d8) Piercing 17-20 120 feet # Building Your Own Traps When designing your own traps, use the Build- ing a Trap table to determine an appropriate total amount of damage for the trap to deal based on its level and severity. If the trap also applies a condi- tion, consider reducing the damage. If the trap requires an attack roll or allows a sav- ing throw, use the appropriate columns on the table to determine the attack bonus or an appropriate save DC. BUILDING A TRAP Nuisance Traps Deadly Traps Levels Attack Bonus Save DC Damage Attack Bonus Save DC Damage 1-4 od 10-12 5 (1d10) +8 13-15 Ti (2d10) 5-10 +4 12-14 11 (2d10) +8 15-17 22 (4d10) 11-16 ad 14-16 22 (4d10) +8 17-19 55 (10d10) 17-20 +4 16-18 55 (10d10) +8 19-21 99 (18d10) # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 103: ey are heer & é A MYSTERIOUS CARRIAGE BRINGS THE VAMPIRE STRAHOD VON ZAROVICH OUT FROM CASTLE RAVENLOFT, \~ = -\_--- CHAPTER # Creating Adventures HETHER YOU'RE CREATING YOUR OWN W adventures or using published ones, this chapter helps you create fun and memo- rable experiences for your players. Creating an adventure involves blending scenes of exploration, social interaction, and combat into a unified whole that meets the needs of your players and your campaign. The basic elements of good storytelling should guide you throughout this pro- cess, joining the encounters into a coherent story. # Step-by-step Adventures Follow these steps to create an adventure: Step 1: Lay Out the Premise. Determine the situ- ation or conflict that underscores the adventure. Also think about the adventure's setting and what is unique and fun about it. Step 2: Draw In the Players. Think about how the characters will get drawn into the situation you've established. Consider how the adventure might tie in with the characters' goals. Step 3: Plan Encounters. Determine the encoun- ters or events that take the characters from the beginning of the adventure to the end. Step 4: Bring It to an End. How do you expect the adventure will end? Think about possible endings as well as rewards for the characters. The rest of this chapter offers inspiration and ad- vice for each of these four steps. Lay OUT THE PREMISE An adventure shares many of the features of a novel, a movie, an issue of a comic, or an episode of a TV show. Comic series and serialized TV dramas are particularly good comparisons because of the way individual adventures are limited in scope but blend together (to some degree) to create a larger narrative. If an adventure is a single episode or season of a series, a campaign is the series as a whole. But while it's worthwhile to compare an adven- ture to these other forms of storytelling, remember that an adventure isn't a complete story until you play it. Your players are coauthors of the story with you, and the events of the story shouldn't be pre- determined; the actions of the players' characters Save to matter. For example, if a major villain shows =p before the end of the adventure, the adventure should allow for the possibility that the heroes defeat that villain. Otherwise, players can feel as if they've been railroaded---set onto a course that has only one destination or outcome, no matter how hard they try to change it. You might find it helpful to think about an adven- ture not as a narrative that arcs from beginning to end with little chance for deviation, but more in terms of situations that you are presenting to the characters. The adventure unfolds organically from the players' responses to the situations you present. # Adventure Premise One way to start brainstorming an adventure is to imagine a situation that might pique the characters' interest. For some D&D players, a rumor of a dun- geon filled with treasure is enough of a premise to launch an adventure. A brewing war between two small nations, the death of a leader and the acces- sion of a new one, a migration of dangerous monsters, the appearance of a comet, and the opening of a portal to another plane of existence are other situations that could lead to adventure. A simple premise might also boil down to "a magic item that the characters want is hidden away in a dungeon." Browsing the magic items in chapter 7 can inspire you to create a simple adventure seed. ---\_ a UsING PuBLISHED ADVENTURES A published adventure includes a pregenerated scenario with the maps, NPCs, monsters, and treasures you need to run it. This allows you to focus your preparation time on plot develop- ments that arise from the characters' actions. You can adjust a published adventure so it better suits your campaign and appeals to your players. For example, you can replace the villain of an adventure with one the players have already encountered in your campaign, or add details from your campaign setting so the adventure involves your players' characters in ways that the adventure's designer never could have imagined. Published adventures also provide inspiration for your own adventures. You can even take a part of an adventure and incorporate it into a differ- ent one. For example, you might use a map of a temple but repopulate it with monsters of your choice, or you might use a chase sequence as a model for a pursuit scene in your campaign. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES 105 st --- \_ GuiDE RAILS AND RAILROADS Players need to feel like they're in control of their characters, the choices they make matter, and what they do has some effect on the outcome of the adventure and on the game world. Keep that in mind as you're planning adventures. If your adventure relies on certain events, plan for multi- ple ways they might come about, or be prepared for clever players to prevent those events from happening as you expect. Otherwise, your players might end up feeling railroaded. On the flip side, players sometimes willfully disregard the adventure hooks you put in front of them and go entirely off the rails. See "Respect for the DM" in chapter 1 and "Draw In the Play- ers" later in this chapter for advice about dealing with this situation. One way to give players impactful choices is to keep multiple adventure possibilities available to them at the same time. If the characters have two or three things they can investigate or pursue, they have a meaningful choice. And if whatever threads they don't investigate turn into bigger problems, you've clearly demonstrated that their decisions matter. = a # Adventure Conflict A premise can be a good starting point, but before you can turn it into an adventure, it needs a conflict worthy of the heroes' attention. The conflict might be driven by a single villain or monster, a villain with lackeys, an assortment of monsters, or an evil organization. But it need not involve the forces of evil; it could be a rivalry or disagreement between two families, organizations, or nations; a looming natural (or magical) disaster; or even conflict within the adventuring party about how to pursue the characters' goals. Given a premise of a dungeon filled with treasure, what conflict awaits the characters when they enter the dungeon? That might be as simple as "hostile monsters want to eat the characters" or "two rival factions of monsters inhabit the dungeon." It might also involve a rival or a villain hoping to plunder the dungeon first, a rumbling volcano threatening to erupt and bury the dungeon, or two rival families claiming ownership of the treasure left behind in the dungeon by their ancestors. If you're stuck, browse through the Monster Man- ual until you find a monster that inspires you. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES # Adventure Situations By Level Use the tables in this section to inspire adventure ideas for characters of different levels, with the range of possible levels grouped into four tiers. You can roll on the tables and see if the result sparks your imagination or read the entries on the tables until you find something that grabs you. LEVELS l---4: LOCAL HEROES The fate of a village might depend on the abilities of fledgling adventurers. These characters navigate dangerous terrain and explore haunted crypts, where they might fight ferocious wolves, giant spiders, evil cultists, flesh-eating ghouls, and ruthless brigands. LEVELS 5---10: HEROES OF THE REALM At this tier, characters undertake adventures that might determine the fate of a region. These adven- turers venture into fearsome wilds and ancient ruins, where they confront giants, hydras, golems, devils, demons, and mind flayers. They might also face a young dragon that has just established a lair. LEVELS 11-16: MASTERS OF THE REALM The fate of a nation or even the world depends on the characters at this tier. These adventurers explore uncharted regions and delve into forgotten dungeons, where the characters confront terrible schemers of the Lower Planes, cunning rakshasas and beholders, and hungry purple worms. They might encounter and even defeat a powerful adult dragon. At this tier, they broker peace between nations or lead them into war, and their formidable reputations attract the attention of powerful foes. LEVELS 17---20: MASTERS OF THE WORLD At this tier, adventures have far-reaching conse- quences, possibly determining the fate of millions on the Material Plane and even places beyond. Characters traverse otherworldly realms and ex- plore demiplanes and other extraplanar locales, where they fight terrible balor demons, titans, arch- devils, liches, ancient dragons, and even manifesta- tions of the gods. ---\_ --- Be WRITING FOR YOURSELF When you're preparing an adventure to run for your friends, you don't need to write hundreds of pages describing each location in exhaustive detail. You can run a game with no more written notes than you'll find in one of the short adven- tures at the end of this chapter. \~ os --- \> LEVELS 1---4 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS 1d20 Situation 1 Adragon wyrmling has gathered a band of kobolds to help it amass a hoard. 2 Wererats living in a city's sewers plot to take control of the governing council. 3 Bandit activity signals efforts to revive an evil cult long ago driven from the region. 4 Apack of gnolls is rampaging dangerously close to local farmlands. 5 Arivalry between two merchant families esca- lates from mischief to mayhem. 6 Anew sinkhole has revealed a long-buried dungeon thought to hold treasure. 7 Miners discovered an underground ruin and were captured by monsters living there. 8 An innocent person is being framed for the crimes of a shape-shifting monster. 9 Ghouls are venturing out of the catacombs at night. 10 Anotorious criminal hides from the law in an old ruin or abandoned mine. 11 Acontagion in a forest is causing spiders to grow massive and become aggressive. 12 To take revenge against a village for an imag- ined slight, a necromancer has been animat- ing the corpses in the village cemetery, 13 An evil cult is spreading in a village. Those who oppose the cult are marked for sacrifice. 14 An abandoned house on the edge of town is haunted by Undead because of a cursed item in the house. 15 Creatures from the Feywild enter the world and cause mischief and misfortune among villagers and their livestock. 16 A hag's curse is making animals unusually aggressive, 17 Bullies have appointed themselves the village militia and are extorting money and food from villagers. 18 After a local fisher pulls a grotesque statue from the sea, aquatic monsters start attack- ing the waterfront at night. 19 The ruins on the hill near the village lie under a curse, so people don't go there---except a scholar who wants to study the ruins. 20 Anew captain has taken charge of a band of pirates or bandits and started raiding more frequently. LEVELS 5-10 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS 1d20 Situation 1 Agroup of cultists has summoned a demon to wreak havoc in the city. 2 Arebel lures monsters to the cause with the promise of looting the king's treasury. 3. Anevil Artifact has transformed a forest into a dismal swamp full of horrific monsters. 4 An Aberration living in the Underdark sends minions to capture people from the surface to turn those people into new minions. 5 Amonster (perhaps a devil, slaad, or hag) is impersonating a prominent noble to throw the realm into civil war. 6 Amaster thief plans to steal royal regalia. 7 Agolem intended to serve as a protector has gone berserk and captured its creator. 8 Aconspiracy of spies, assassins, and necro- mancers schemes to overthrow a ruler, 9 After establishing a lair, a young dragon is trying to earn the fear and respect of other creatures living nearby. 10 The approach of a lone giant alarms the peo- ple of a town, but the giant is simply looking for a place to live in peace. 11 Anenormous monster on display in a menag- erie breaks free and goes on a rampage. 12 Acoven of hags steals cherished memories from travelers. 13. Avillain seeks powerful magic in an ancient ruin, hoping to use it to conquer the region. 14 Ascheming aristocrat hosts a masquerade ball, which many guests see as an opportu- nity to advance their own agendas. At least one shape-shifting monster also attends. 15 A ship carrying a valuable treasure or an evil Artifact sinks in a storm or monster attack. 16 Anatural disaster was actually caused by magic gone awry or a cult's villainous plans. 17 Asecretive cult uses spies to heighten ten- sions between two rival nations, hoping to provoke a war that will weaken both. 18 Rebels or forces of an enemy nation have kid- napped an important noble. 19 The descendants of a displaced people want to reclaim their ancestral city, which is now inhabited by monsters. 20 Arenowned group of adventurers never re- turned from an expedition to a famous ruin. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES # The Death Of An An Nt Oragon # Can Shake The Fo # The Worlo LEVELS 11-16 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS 1d12\_ Situation 1 Aportal to the Abyss opens in a cursed loca- tion and spews demons into the world. 2 Aband of hunting giants has driven its prey---enormous beasts---into pastureland. 3 An adult dragon's lair is transforming an expanse into an environment inhospitable to the other creatures living there. 4 Along-lost journal describes an incredible journey to a hidden subterranean realm full of magical wonders. 5 Cultists hope to persuade a dragon to un- dergo the rite that will transform it into a dracolich. 6 The ruler of the realm is sending an emissary to a hostile neighbor to negotiate a truce, and the emissary needs protection. 7 Acastle or city has been drawn into another plane of existence. 8 Astorm tears across the land, with a mysteri- ous flying citadel in the eye of the storm. 9 Two parts of a magic item are in the hands of bitter enemies; the third piece is lost, 10 Evil cultists gather from around the world to summon a monstrous god or alien entity. 11 Atyrannical ruler outlaws the use of magic without official sanction. A secret society of spellcasters seeks to oust the tyrant. 12 During a drought, low water levels in a lake reveal previously unknown ancient ruins that contain a powerful evil. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES LEVELS 17---20 ADVENTURE SITUATIONS 1d10 Situation 1 10 An ancient dragon is scheming to destroy a god and take the god's place in the pantheon. The dragon's minions are searching for Arti- facts that can summon and weaken this god. A band of giants drove away a metallic dragon and took over the dragon's lair, and the dragon wants to reclaim the lair. An ancient hero returns from the dead to prepare the world for the return of an equally ancient monster. An ancient Artifact has the power to defeat or imprison a rampaging titan. A god of agriculture is angry, causing rivers to dry up and crops to wither. An Artifact belonging to a god falls into mortal hands, A titan imprisoned in the Underdark begins to break free, causing terrible earthquakes that are only a hint of the destruction that the titan will cause if it is released. A lich tries to exterminate any spellcasters that approach the lich's level of power. A holy temple was built around a portal lead- ing to one of the Lower Planes to prevent any evil from passing through in either direction. Now the temple has come under siege from both directions. Five ancient metallic dragons lair in the Pillars of Creation. If all these dragons are killed, the world will collapse into chaos. One has just been slain. ADVENTURE SETTING Many D&D adventures revolve dungeons---interior spaces such as great halls and tombs, subterranean monster lairs, mazes riddled with traps, natural cav- erns extending for miles beneath the surface, and ruined castles. The "Dungeons" section in chapter 3 can help you craft a dungeon environment for an adventure. Of course, not every adventure takes place in a dungeon. A wilderness trek across the desert or a harrowing journey into the jungle can be an excit- ing adventure in its own right. Outdoors, dragons wheel across the sky in search of prey, fierce war- riors pour forth from grim fortresses to wage war against their neighbors, ogres and trolls plunder farmsteads for food, and monstrous spiders drop from web-shrouded trees. Adventures can also take place in cities, towns, and villages, which are often no less dangerous than dungeons or the wilds. The "Settlements" section in chapter 3 can help you create a settlement where an adventure can take place. # Adventure Maps An adventure location almost always benefits from a map, and the more thoughtfully constructed the map is, the more fun players are likely to have as their characters explore the location. Maps and Adventure Structure. An adventure map can take many forms---from a detailed dungeon map that shows the dimensions and contents of ev- ery room to a rough outline of how one encounter might lead to another, depending on the route the characters choose. Whatever form your map takes, it functions as a flowchart since each decision point (a branch in a corridor, a room with multiple exits) leads to new decision points. If the characters leave a room by the north door, you check your map and determine it leads them into the great hall, lined with pillars, where the fire giant king holds court. COMMON Map SymBoLs = Open Dooawar Porrcuis If they leave by the secret door to the southeast, you check the map and follow the secret tunnel as it winds to the hidden vaults below the great hall. Sample Maps. Appendix B contains maps you can use for your adventures or as inspiration for your own maps. You can also modify those maps to fit the details of the location you have in mind. Map Inspiration. The internet is a great place to find adventure maps that have been made avail- able, as well as real-world building floor plans and city maps and other images that can inspire your mapmaking. # Bringing A Location To Life An inhabited adventure location has its own ecosys- tem. The creatures that live there need to eat, drink, breathe, and sleep. Predators need prey, and intel- ligent creatures search for lairs offering the best combination of air, food, water, and security. Keep these factors in mind when designing an adventure location. If the site has an internal logic, adven- turers can use their understanding of that logic to make informed decisions. For example, characters who find a pool of fresh water in a dungeon might infer that many of the creatures inhabiting the dungeon come to that spot to drink. The adventurers might set an ambush at the pool. Likewise, closed or locked doors can re- strict the movement of some creatures. A dungeon infested with carrion crawlers or stirges would need open passages so that these creatures can move about to find food. # Adventure Inhabitants The monsters in any adventure location are more than a collection of random creatures that happen to live near one another. Fungi, natural animals, scavengers, and predators can coexist in a complex ecology, alongside sapient creatures who share liv- ing space through some combination of negotiation and domination. Trap Door IN CENLING \| © pa Tuan Teverto LeOGe } SPinnuSrains Secaer Tra ES # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES 109 Each creature's entry in the Monster Manual indi cates the terrain types where that creature is most often found, and that book also includes tables list- ing the creatures commonly found within each type of terrain. Using that information, you can decide which creatures inhabit an adventure location within a particular environment. You can choose a range of creatures, from common vermin to sapient inhabitants and terrifying predators, and decide how they live together. Factions. Particularly in larger areas, groups of creatures might compete for resources. When these groups consist of sapient creatures, opportunities abound for the adventurers who enter those ar- eas. Characters might ally with one group or play groups against each other to reduce the threat of the more powerful monsters. For example, in a dun- geon inhabited by mind flayers and the grimlocks they rule, the adventurers might try to incite the grimlocks to revolt against the mind flayers. Bring the NPC leaders of groups to life as de- scribed in the "Nonplayer Characters" section in chapter 3, fleshing out their personalities and goals. rhen use those elements to decide how those lead ers respond to adventurers. # Draw In The Players If an adventure situation directly affects the char- acters or the people and places they care about, that is often enough motivation for the characters to get involved. (However, see "Respect for the Players" in chapter \| for advice about harming the people and places characters love.) If the adventure situation doesn't have an obvious impact on the characters or the people or things they care about, you can use other techniques to draw in the players. These are best tailored to the motivations of your players and their characters. For example, some adventuring groups are noble heroes who respond without hesitation to the pleas of innocent villagers crying for help; other groups are hardened mercenaries who respond only to of- fers of payment. Some groups are devoted to gods, rulers, or other patrons who might send them on quests, either directly or through intermediaries. # Adventure Patrons Many adventures begin with a patron asking the characters to undertake a quest or missic offering a reward in exchange for this service. Take the time to flesh out an NPC who serves as a patron. Once in a while, it can be interesting for the characters' patron to betray them. Pulling that trick more than once in a campaign, though, is likely to make the players unwilling to trust any future pa- trons and possibly suspicious about any adventure hooks you put in front of them. The Patron Hooks table offers some suggestions for ways a patron can lead characters to an adven- ture situation. The "Campaign Start" section in chapter 5 offers some more suggestions for patrons. PaTRON Hooks 1d6 Hook 1 A town crier announces that someone is hoping to hire adventurers. 2 Someone the characters want to impress or need a favor from asks them to deal with the adventure situation. 3. When the characters arrive in a new city, they find a job board where someone has posted in search of adventurers. 4 Awealthy patron who is aware of the adven- turers' accomplishments writes to them, offering to pay them for their talents. 5 Acitizen in need, who has learned of the adventurers' accomplishments and kindness, travels miles to find them and implore them for help. 6 The adventurers are arrested (on valid or invented charges) and offered a chance to escape punishment by completing a quest. oa a Susvert CLICHES As you populate your world with interesting supporting characters, consider the following: Avoiding Stereotypes. Show how multiple people from the same culture are different. Don't use a real-world accent in a disparaging way. Beautiful Diversity. Feature members of different genders, ethnicities, and sexualities, as well as people with varied capabilities, beliefs, roles, professions, interests, and outlooks. Fresh Spin. Whenever possible, put a fresh spin on a familiar trope. The mysterious figure who presents adventurers with a quest on behalf of the king might be the king in disguise. The wiz- ard in the tower might be a projected illusion created by a band of thieves to guard their loot. Relatability. Treat NPCs as real people with real motivations. Put yourself in their shoes. What would you do? = # Supernatural Hooks Celestial omens, vivid dreams, or other magical phenomena can point characters to the adventure situation and suggest a course of action. The Super- natural Hooks table offers some suggestions. SUPERNATURAL Hooks 1d6 Hook 1 The characters all have a vivid dream that foreshadows elements of the adventure. 2 While preparing spells, one character receives a quest from a god or patron. 3 A fortune teller's reading for one of the characters points to a quest and offers hints about challenges that lie ahead. 4 Flames, clouds, smoke, or huge flocks of birds take distinct shapes that portend the adventure situation. 5. Animals or animated objects speak clearly to direct the adventurers toward the situation. 6 Someone who died returns as a ghost and haunts the characters. The ghost prompts the characters to investigate the cause of the ghost's death and put it to rest. # Happenstance Hooks Sometimes, characters just happen on an adventure through sheer coincidence---or at least what appears to be coincidence (which might actually involve divine or other supernatural intervention). The Happenstance Hooks table provides some ideas. HAPPENSTANCE Hooks 1d6 Hook 1 The characters find a letter describing the adventure situation. 2 'The characters are on an unrelated quest, such as searching for a particular magic item, that leads them into the adventure situation. 3. The adventure situation disrupts a festival or ceremony that the characters are attending. 4 Amagical mishap places the characters in the adventure situation. 5 While traveling in a caravan or aboard a ship, the characters befriend an NPC who has news about the adventure situation. 6 The characters are attacked after being mis- taken for another group of adventurers. They learn about the adventure situation from a clue left behind by their attackers. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES Tit '\ # Plan Encounters Encounters are the individual scenes in the larger story of your adventure. Reduced to fundamentals, an encounter is an objective with an obstacle. It accomplishes one or more of the following: - Moving characters closer to achieving a goal - Frustrating the characters' progress toward a goal - Revealing new information # Character Objectives The following objectives can be foundations for encounters. Although these objectives focus on a single encounter during an adventure, using the same objective in multiple encounters allows you to combine these encounters into a larger obstacle or problem the adventurers must overcome, # Make Peace The characters must convince two opposing groups (or their leaders) to end the conflict that embroils them. As a complication, the characters might have enemies on one or both of the opposing sides, or some other group or individual might be instigating the conflict to further its own ends. An encounter aimed at making peace might involve only social interaction, perhaps with the threat of combat if ne- gotiations go poorly. It could also begin as a combat encounter, with the characters trying to stop the fighting and get the parties talking to each other, PROTECT AN NPC or OBjEcT The characters must act as bodyguards or protect some object in their custody. As a complication, an NPC under the party's protection might be cursed, panicked, unable to fight, or apt to risk the lives of the adventurers through dubious decisions. The object the adventurers have sworn to protect might be sentient, cursed, or difficult to transport. Such an encounter might be a combat encounter or an exploration encounter, with either Hostile monsters or a dangerous environment threatening the NPC or object the characters are trying to protect. If the characters are protecting an NPC, this objective can add an element of social interaction to a combat or exploration encounter. # Retrieve An Object The adventurers must gain possession of a specific object in the area of the encounter, often with a time limit. This might be a combat encounter, with monsters protecting the object, or an exploration encounter, with traps or hazards preventing access to the object. As a complication, enemies might de- sire the object as much as the adventurers do, add- ing a combat element to an exploration encounter or complicating a combat. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES es RuN A GAUNTLET The adventurers must pass through a dangerous area. As with retrieving an object, reaching the exit is a higher priority than killing opponents in the area. A time limit adds a complication, as does a de- cision point that might lead characters astray. This might be an exploration encounter, with traps and hazards as complications, or a combat encounter against Hostile monsters. # Sneak In The adventurers need to move through the encoun- ter area without their enemies noticing. This is typi- cally an exploration encounter, but if the characters are detected, a combat encounter or social interac- tion might result. Stor A RITUAL The plots of evil cult leaders, malevolent spellcast- ers, and Fiends often involve rituals that must be foiled. In a combat encounter, characters might have to fight their way through evil minions before attempting to disrupt the ritual's magic. This could also drive an exploration encounter, where the challenge is getting to the place where the ritual is occurring, or a social interaction encounter, where the objective is convincing the ritual leaders to stop their rite. As a complication, the ritual might be close to completion when the characters arrive, imposing a time limit. The ritual's completion might have immediate consequences, too. TAKE OvuT A SINGLE TARGET A villain the characters seek to defeat is surrounded by minions powerful enough to kill the adventurers. The characters can flee and hope to confront the villain another day, or they can try to fight their way through the minions. As a complication, the minions might be innocent creatures under the villain's control. Killing the villain means breaking that control, but the adventurers must endure the minions' attacks until the villain falls. # Keeping The Adventure Moving Make sure your players have clear objectives they can pursue at every stage of the adventure. Three simple techniques can ensure that the players un- derstand the task at hand and how to pursue it: Adviser NPCs. A helpful NPC in a social interaction can offer advice and suggestions to the characters. Such an NPC might be the patron who initially sent the characters on the adventure, someone they met along the way, or a character's contact. When you're planning an adventure, include NPCs who can fill this role. # Goblin Raiders Prepare # An Ambush In A Gorge Evil Intrusion. If things start grinding to a halt, have the characters encounter a minion or mon- ster connected to the adventure's main threat. At the end of the encounter, perhaps the characters find information that gets them back on track. Plan one or two encounters like this ahead of time. The DM's Role. If the characters can't figure out how to solve an encounter or aren't sure what to do next, you can remind the players of things their characters have already learned or call for Intelligence (Investigation) or similar checks to see if their characters can remember and connect things that the players might be missing. # Something For Everyone As described in the "Know Your Players" section in chapter 2, players have different tastes in the activ- ities they enjoy in the game. An adventure needs to account for the different players and characters in your group to draw them into the story. An adventure that includes a balance of explo- ration, social interaction, and combat is likely to appeal to a wide breadth of players. But an adven- ture you create for your home campaign doesn't have to appeal to every possible player interest--- only to the players at your table. You can design encounters that appeal to multi- ple player motivations. Imagine a fight pitting the characters against a gang of gnolls, delighting the players who enjoy fighting. Then a young dragon wanders into the middle of the fight. Suddenly the fight can swing one of two ways: the dragon could help the gnolls against the party or help the party against the gnolls. It's up to the players who thrive on acting to persuade the dragon to help the party. # Multiple Ways To Progress Make sure there are multiple ways the characters can progress through the adventure at any point, so if they miss one way, they have an alternative. Plan opportunities for the adventure to move forward even when the characters fail. Use challenges with a single path to success only as chances for the char- acters to obtain extra rewards. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES 113 114 # Social Interaction Encounters The "Running Social Interaction" section in chapter 2 offers advice for handling social interaction en- counters and can help you craft these encounters. The "Nonplayer Characters" section in chapter 3 is also essential for creating these encounters. # Exploration Encounters An encounter centered on exploration might in- volve the characters trying to disarm a trap, finda secret door, or discover something about the adven- ture location. An exploration encounter could also involve the characters spending a day crossing a rolling plain or traversing vast caverns. The "Running Exploration" section in chapter 2 can help you craft these encounters as well as run them. Various sections in chapter 3 can also help you detail obstacles and dangers in an exploration encounter: see "Chases," "Curses and Magical Con- tagions," "Doors," "Environmental Effects," "Haz- ards," "Poison," and "Traps" in particular. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES COMBAT ENCOUNTERS \| The following features can make a combat encoun- ter more interesting or challenging: Changes in Elevation. Terrain features that pro- vide a change of elevation (such as stacks of empty crates, ledges, and balconies) reward clever positioning and encourage characters to jump, climb, fly, or teleport. Defensive Positions. Enemies in hard-to-reach locations or defensive positions force characters who normally attack at range to move around. Hazards. The "Hazards" section in chapter 3 de- scribes dangerous features, such as patches of green slime, that characters or their enemies can use to their advantage. Mixed Monster Groups. When different types of monsters work together, they can combine their abilities---just like characters with different classes and origins. A diverse force is more powerful. Reasons to Move. Use features that encourage characters and their enemies to move around, such as chandeliers, kegs of gunpowder or oil, and rolling stone traps. COMBAT ENCOUNTER DIFFICULTY Use the following guidelines to create a combat en- counter of a desired level of difficulty. Step I: Choose a Difficulty. Three categories de- scribe the range of encounter difficulty: Low Difficulty. An encounter of low difficulty is likely to have one or two scary moments for the players, but their characters should emerge vic- torious with no casualties. One or more of them might need to use healing resources, however. As a rough guideline, a single monster generally presents a low-difficulty challenge for a party of four characters whose level equals the monster's Challenge Rating. Moderate Difficulty. Absent healing and other re- sources, an encounter of moderate difficulty could go badly for the adventurers. Weaker characters might get taken out of the fight, and there's a slim chance that one or more characters might die. High Difficulty. A high-difficulty encounter could be lethal for one or more characters. To survive it, the characters will need smart tactics, quick thinking, and maybe even a little luck. Step 2: Determine Your XP Budget. Using the XP Budget per Character table, cross-reference the party's level with the desired encounter difficulty. Multiply the number in the table by the number of characters in the party to get your XP budget for the encounter.