# Change The Monster You can transform one monster into another to keep a fight interesting. Maybe a worg splits open, and a gibbering mouther spills out to take its place. Or a cultist is consumed in a pillar of infernal flame, and a devil erupts from the ashes. You can also alter a monster's stat block in subtle ways in the middle of combat; for example, you might decide that a monster flies into a frenzy when it's Bloodied, giv- ing it Advantage on its attack rolls---and giving the characters Advantage on their attack rolls against it as well, speeding the fight to an end. # Adjusting Difficulty Many of the same techniques that help keep com- bat moving can also be useful in situations where a combat encounter is either harder or easier than you anticipated and you want to adjust it. Monsters might initiate negotiations when they're winning, allowing overmatched characters a chance to sur- render or retreat. One of the monsters might switch sides and help the characters defeat its kin (for noble or selfish reasons). A change of terrain can provide characters a chance to escape or give over- matched monsters an edge. # Fight Or Flight Few creatures fight to the death. Nearly all crea- tures have survival instincts that cause them to reevaluate their tactics in the face of their own destruction. Sapient creatures confronted by obviously more numerous or powerful opponents usually try to avoid battle. But brave, desperate, or devoted creatures might never retreat from a battle. If you can't decide whether a creature is willing to fight, have it make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw before Initiative is rolled. You can set the DC higher # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME or lower if you like. On a failed save, the creature either flees or tries to parley with the enemy (see "Avoiding or Ending a Fight" below). On a success- ful save, the creature is willing to fight. When deal- ing with a group of creatures, the leader makes this saving throw on behalf of the group. When creatures that are already engaged in battle realize they're likely to lose, they usually try to exit that battle. A monster is likely to flee if either of the following is true: - The monster starts its turn Bloodied and more than half its allies are dead or have the Incapaci- tated condition, while no one is dead or Incapaci- tated on the other side. - The monster starts its turn Bloodied and has the Frightened condition. In those circumstances, you can decide the monster flees, or you can have it make a DC 10 Wisdom sav- ing throw and flee or parley on a failed save. In gen- eral, if it is obvious to you that a creature is going to lose, assume it's obvious to that creature as well. AVOIDING OR ENDING A FIGHT A creature that wishes to end or avoid a fight has two options: Flight. The creature can retreat or run away on its turn. Select a destination for the fleeing party, such as a known place of safety (perhaps a room with a door that can be closed and barred). If the opponents pursue, you can use the "Chases" sec- tion in chapter 3 to help adjudicate what happens. Parley. A parley is an attempt to settle a conflict nonviolently. The side that wishes to end or avoid combat offers to surrender or proposes some sort of exchange. If one side wants to parley in the middle of combat and the other side agrees, you can suspend the Initiative order for some interac- tion. If the two sides don't come to an agreement, pick up the Initiative order where it left off. # Character Advancement Experience Points (XP) fuel level advancement for player characters and are most often the reward for completing combat encounters. # Awarding Xp Each monster has an XP value based on its Chal- lenge Rating. When adventurers overcome one or more monsters---typically by killing, routing, cap- turing, or cleverly avoiding them---they divide the total XP value of the monsters evenly among them- selves. If the party received substantial assistance from one or more NPCs, count those NPCs as party members when dividing up the XP, since the NPCs made the challenge easier. (See also "Nonplayer Characters" in chapter 3.) # Noncombat Challenges You decide whether to award XP to characters for overcoming challenges outside combat. If the adventurers complete a tense negotiation with a baron, forge a trade agreement with a guild of surly smiths, or safely navigate the Chasm of Doom, you might decide the characters deserve XP. Asa starting point, use the rules for building combat encounters in chapter 4 to gauge the diffi- culty of the challenge. Then award the characters XP as if it had been a combat encounter of the same difficulty. MILESTONES You can also award XP when characters complete significant milestones. When preparing your adven- ture, designate certain events or challenges as mile- stones, as with the following examples: - Accomplishing one in a series of goals necessary to complete the adventure. - Discovering a hidden location or piece of informa- tion relevant to the adventure. - Reaching an important destination. When awarding XP, treat a major milestone as a high-difficulty encounter and a minor milestone as a low-difficulty encounter. Other Milestone Rewards. If you want to reward your players for their progress through an adven- ture with something more than XP and treasure, also give them small rewards at milestone points, such as the following: - The adventurers gain the benefit of a Short Rest. - Characters recover a Hit Point Die or a level 1 spell slot. - Characters regain the use of magic items that have had their limited uses expended. LEVELING Up Some DMs let characters gain the benefits of a new level as soon as the characters have the required XP, which gives the players the joy of using the new features and spells they gain immediately. Other DMs prefer to wait until the characters take a Long Rest or until the end of a session before letting char- acters level up, which keeps the adventure flowing smoothly and lets players pore over their new options during a lull in the action or between sessions. Do what works best for your group. If a character levels up outside a Long Rest, the character's current Hit Points and Hit Point max- imum both increase by the appropriate number for the new level, and the character gains access to additional abilities and spell slots (if appropriate) without regaining any that are already expended. VARIANT: TRAINING TO GAIN LEVELS As a variant rule, you can require characters to spend time between adventures training or study- ing before they gain the benefits of a new level. This variant slows the passage of time in the game world, which can help support a more realistic or gritty tone in your campaign. If you choose this option, after earning enough Experience Points to attain a new level, a character must train for a number of days before gaining any class features associated with the new level. You can decide whether the character can train inde- pendently or requires a trainer. The training time required depends on the level to be gained, as shown on the Training to Gain Levels table. The training cost is for the total training time. # Training To Gain Levels Level Attained Training Time Training Cost 2-4 10 days 20 GP 5-10 20 days 40 GP 1-16 30 days 60 GP 17-20 40 days 80 GP # Level Advancement Without Xp You can do away with XP entirely and advance characters based on how many sessions they play or when the characters accomplish significant story goals. This method of level advancement can be par- ticularly helpful if your campaign doesn't include much combat or includes so much combat that tracking XP becomes tiresome. # Session-based Advancement A good rate of session-based advancement is to have characters reach level 2 after the first session of play, level 3 after another session, and level 4 after two more sessions. Then spend two or three ses- sions for each subsequent level. Above level 10, you can speed the rate of advancement so the characters gain a new level every one or two sessions. This assumes your sessions are about four hours long and include encounters of varying difficulty, ending with a significant milestone as described above. You can adjust the rate if you prefer significantly shorter or longer sessions and to account for how much your group accomplishes in a typical session. Story-BASED ADVANCEMENT Rather than having characters gain a level after a certain number of sessions, you can instead tie their advancement to accomplishing particular goals in the campaign. When the characters achieve those goals, they level up. Try to plan significant cam- paign goals so the characters gain levels at about the same rate as for session-based advancement. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 49 Me A BLOB OF ANNIHILATION ATTACKS SHARN, THE City oF Towers, IN THE WORLO or EBERRON, # Chapter 3 DM's TOOLBOX HEREAS CHAPTERS \| AND 2 TEACH THE W essentials of being a Dungeon Master, this chapter provides advice on topics that can surface as you prepare or run a D&D game session, as well as rules for adventure elements ranging from chases and doors to traps. It also in- cludes guidance on creating new backgrounds, crea- tures, magic items, and spells to amuse your players. ALIGNMENT As described in the Player's Handbook, alignment is a roleplaying tool. It is a quick way to describe a creature's moral and ethical orientation. Like other elements of the game, it's meant to be a tool to serve you and your game, not a constraint or burden. Alignment can help your game in three ways: as a tool for player characters, as a descriptor of a crea- ture's demeanor, and as a summary of an organiza- tion's ethos. # Character Alignment Some common misconceptions about alignment can cause conflicts between players and DMs. The following sections can help you navigate how player characters interact with alignment. ACTIONS INDICATE ALIGNMENT A character might think they're good and profess to believe that senseless slaughter is wrong, but if that character repeatedly engages in senseless slaughter, the character's beliefs aren't what they profess. Alignment doesn't limit the actions characters can take; rather, the actions they take indicate what their alignment is. It's OK to stray from the tenets of one's alignment now and then, and players can (and should) change their characters' alignments if these alignments no longer describe their characters. Goop AND EvIL CAN COOPERATE Good and evil characters can share common goals, though they'll likely use different tactics to pursue those goals. Imagine two characters---one Lawful Good, the other Lawful Evil---who are both dedicated to stop- ping monsters from preying on the people of their city. The Lawful Evil character is willing to employ methods (such as bribing or threatening potential witnesses) that the Lawful Good character isn't. When good- and evil-aligned adventurers coexist in the same party, they're likely to have disagree- ments as the campaign unfolds. Many players enjoy roleplaying such conflicts, but see "Ensuring Fun for All" in chapter 1 if you run into trouble with evil characters played in a disruptive way. # Planes And Alignment The Outer Planes (described in chapter 6) are realms where alignment manifests in reality. When creatures explore the Outer Planes, they can expe- rience those realms differently depending on their alignment. # Monster Alignment Alignment can help you determine how a creature behaves in your game in two simple ways. # Starting Attitude A creature's alignment can help you determine the creature's attitude in an encounter. A Chaotic Evil monster is likely to be Hostile, while a Lawful Good one is more likely to have a Friendly attitude, ready to help those in need. PERSONALITY Chapter 2 of the Player's Handbook offers a table of brief personality traits linked to alignment that can inspire you in playing an NPC or another monster in your game. # Organization Ethos It can be useful to assign an alignment to an organi- zation---including a faction, a guild, or a nation---to describe its ethos, This can help you decide how groups interact with each other. An organization's ethos doesn't dictate the align- ment of its members or even the alignment of its leaders. In fact, a stark difference between a soci- ety's ethos and the alignment of its leadership can generate interesting material for adventure. For ex- ample, imagine a Neutral Good queen ascending to the throne of a Lawful Evil empire and struggling to reform its institutions. | Stayt 4 # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX >... 5K os | teens "whe ee, et \| The rules for movement in combat don't translate to every situation. In particular, they can make a po- tentially thrilling chase seem dull and predictable. Faster creatures always catch up to slower ones, while creatures with the same Speed never close the distance between each other. Use the follow- ing rules to introduce random elements that make chases more exciting. Know the capabilities of the characters in your party before you make a chase an important feature of an adventure. A character with a high Speed or the right spell (such as Dimension Door, Fly, or Hold Monster) can often end a chase before it begins. # Beginning A Chase A chase requires at least one quarry and at least one pursuer. Any participants not already in Initiative order must roll Initiative as the chase begins. As in combat, each participant in the chase can take one action and move on its turn. When a chase begins, determine the starting distance between the quarry and the pursuers, Track the distance between them, and designate the pursuer closest to the quarry as the lead. The lead pursuer might change from round to round, # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX " # An Exciting Chase Nears Its Conclusion és hi: ol = = \~--- Py b ---\* Fer WN \~ # Running The Chase Participants in the chase are strongly motivated to take the Dash action every round. Pursuers who stop to cast spells and make attacks run the risk of losing their quarry, and a quarry that doesn't take the Dash action is likely to be caught. DASHING A chase participant can take the Dash action a num- ber of times equal to 3 plus its Constitution modifier (minimum of once). Each additional Dash action it takes during the chase requires the creature to succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw at the end of its turn or gain 1 Exhaustion level. A participant drops out of the chase if its Speed is 0. SPELLS AND ATTACKS A chase participant can make attacks and cast spells against other creatures within range. Chase participants can't normally make Oppor- tunity Attacks against each other, since they are all assumed to be moving in the same direction at the same time. However, participants can still be the targets of Opportunity Attacks from creatures not participating in the chase. For example, adventurers who chase a thief past a gang of ruffians might pro- voke Opportunity Attacks from the ruffians. # Ending A Chase A chase ends when one side or the other stops, when each quarry escapes, or when the pursuers are close enough to their quarry to catch it. If neither side gives up the chase, the quarry makes a Dexterity (Stealth) check on Initiative count O each round, after every participant in the chase has taken its turn. If the quarry is never out of the lead pursuer's sight, the check fails automat- ically. Otherwise, compare the check's total to the Passive Perception scores of the pursuers. If the quarry consists of multiple creatures, they all make the check separately, so it's possible for one quarry to escape while others remain in the chase. The quarry can gain Advantage or Disadvantage on its check based on the circumstances, as shown in the Escape Factors table. Escape Factors Factor Check Has... Many things to hide behind Advantage A very crowded area Advantage Few things to hide behind Disadvantage An uncrowded area Disadvantage Other factors might help or hinder the quarry's ability to escape, at your discretion. For example, a quarry with a Faerie Fire spell cast on it might have Disadvantage on checks made to escape because it's much easier to spot. If the total of the quarry's check is greater than the highest Passive Perception score of the pursu- ers, the quarry escapes. If not, the chase continues for another round. Escape doesn't necessarily mean the quarry has outpaced its pursuers. For example, im a city, escape might mean the quarry ducked into 2 crowd or slipped around a corner, leaving no clue 2s to where it went. SPLITTING Up Creatures being chased can split up into smaller eroups. This tactic forces pursuers to either divide their forces or allow some of the quarry to escape. fa pursuit splits into several smaller chases, resolve each chase separately. You can keep all the creatures in Initiative order, but track the distances separately for each group. # Role Reversal Dering a chase, it's possible for the pursuers to be- come the quarry. For example, characters chasing a thief through a marketplace might draw unwanted attention from other members of the thieves' guild. As they pursue the fleeing thief, they must also 3 evade the thieves pursuing them. Roll Initiative for the new arrivals, and run both chases simultane- ously. Alternatively, the fleeing thief might run into his accomplices. The outnumbered characters might then flee with the thieves in pursuit. # Mapping The Chase When you plan a chase, draw a rough map that shows the route. Insert obstacles and complications at specific points, especially ones that require the characters to make ability checks or saving throws to avoid slowing or stopping, or use the random ta- bles of complications in the "Chase Complications" section to choose obstacles that occur at specific points. Complications can be barriers to progress or op- portunities for mayhem. Characters being chased through a forest by bugbears might spot a wasp nest and slow down long enough to attack the nest or throw rocks at it to enrage the wasps within, thus creating an obstacle for their pursuers. A map of a chase can be linear or have many \| branches, depending on the nature of the chase. For example, a mine cart chase might have few (if any) branches, while a sewer chase might have several. # Chase Complications Unexpected complications make a chase more excit- ing. The accompanying Urban Chase Complications table and Wilderness Chase Complications table provide several examples. Each participant in the chase rolls 1d12 at the end of its turn. Consult the appropriate table to determine whether a complica- tion occurs. If it does, it affects the next chase participant in the Initiative order, not the participant who rolled the die. Characters can create their own complications to shake off pursuers or slow their quarry (for ex- ample, casting the Web spell in a narrow alleyway). Adjudicate these at your discretion. DESIGNING YOUR OWN CHASE TABLES Unusual environments might suggest unique chase \| tables. A chase through the sewers of the Free City of Greyhawk or through the spiderweb-filled alleys of Menzoberranzan (a subterranean city teeming with spiders and worshipers of Lolth) might inspire you to create your own tables. # CHAPTER\| DM'S TOOLBOX 53 OE FEE WT eS ONES a A ## rm \> ------ ee yr: Pies 7 TA: +e # Urban Chase Complications 1d12 1 7-12 54 # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX Complication A cart or another large obstacle blocks your way. Make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw to get past the obstacle. On a failed save, the obstacle counts as 10 feet of Difficult Terrain for you. A crowd blocks your way. Make a DC 10 Strength, Dexterity, or Charisma saving throw (your choice) to navigate through the crowd. On a failed save, the crowd counts as 10 feet of Difficult Terrain for you. A maze of barrels, crates, or similar ob- stacles stands in your way. Make a DC 10 Dexterity or Intelligence saving throw (your choice) to navigate the maze. On a failed save, the maze counts as 10 feet of Difficult Terrain for you. The ground is slippery with rain, spilled oil, or some other liquid. Make a DC 10 Dexter- ity saving throw. On a failed save, you have the Prone condition. You encounter a brawl in progress. Make a DC 15 Strength, Dexterity, or Charisma saving throw (your choice) to get past the brawlers unimpeded. On a failed save, you take 2d4 Bludgeoning damage, and the brawlers count as 10 feet of Difficult Terrain for you. You must make a sharp turn to avoid col- liding with something impassable. Make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw to navigate the turn. On a failed save, you collide with something hard and take 1d4 Bludgeoning damage. There is no complication. WILDERNESS CHASE COMPLICATIONS 1d12 Complication 1 You pass through a Swarm of Insects (see the Monster Manual, with the DM choosing whichever kind of insects makes the most sense). The swarm uses one of its actions, targeting you. A stream or ravine blocks your path. Make a DC 10 Strength or Dexterity saving throw (your choice) to cross the impediment. On a failed save, the impediment counts as 10 feet of Difficult Terrain for you. Make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, blowing sand, dirt, ash, snow, or pollen causes you to have the Blinded condi- tion until the end of your turn. While you are Blinded in this way, your Speed is halved. A sudden drop catches you by surprise. Make a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw to navigate the impediment. On a failed save, you fall 10 feet. Your path takes you near a patch of razorvine (see "Hazards" in this chapter). Make a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or use 10 feet of movement (your choice) to avoid the razorvine. On a failed save, you take 1410 Slashing damage. A creature native to the area notices you. (The DM chooses a creature appropriate for the terrain.) Make a DC 10 Wisdom or Charisma saving throw (your choice). On a failed save, the creature joins the chase, with you as its quarry. 7-12 There is no complication. # An Ill-adviseo Attempt To # Steal Xanathar's Pet Golofish SYLGAR, LEADS TO A WEATED CHASE You MIGHT ALTER THE SAILOR BACKGROUND TO # Reflect A Character's Youth On The # Seas Of Grevhawk # Creating A Background A character's background represents what the char- acter did prior to becoming an adventurer. Creating a unique background or customizing an existing one from the Player's Handbook can reflect the par- ticular theme of your campaign or elements of your world. You can also create a background to help a player craft the story they have in mind for their character. This section describes, step by step, how you can create backgrounds like the ones in the Player's Handbook, tailored for your world and the heroes in it. 1: CHOOSE ABILITIES Choose three abilities that seem appropriate for the background: Strength or Dexterity. These abilities are ideal for a background involving physical exertion. Constitution. This ability is ideal for a background that involves endurance or long hours of activity. Intelligence or Wisdom. One or both abilities are ideal for a background that focuses on cerebral or spiritual matters. Charisma. This ability is ideal for a background that involves performance or social interaction. 2: CHOOSE A FEAT Choose one feat from the Origin category. See the Player's Handbook for examples of Origin feats. 3: CHOOSE SKILL PROFICIENCIES Choose two skills appropriate for the background. There needn't be a relationship between the skill proficiencies a background grants and the ability scores it increases. 4: CHOOSE A TOOL PROFICIENCY Choose one tool used in the practice of the back- ground or often associated with it. 5: CHOOSE EQUIPMENT Assemble a package of equipment worth 50 GP (in- cluding unspent gold). Don't include Martial weap- ons or armor, as characters get them from their class choices. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 55 Basa YAGA INVENTS A NEW CREATURE\~A FIRE-BREATHING GIANT TOAD! # Creating A Creature Use the approaches and examples in the following sections to build custom creatures for your game. # Minor Alterations You can change the superficial details of a creature's appearance however you like, and you can alter any of the following pieces of a monster's stat block without impacting its functionality. # Size And Creature Type You can alter a creature's size and creature type as you please. For example, you can use an Ogre stat block for a human bully---just make it a Medium Hu- manoid instead of a Large Giant. # Ability Scores You can usually change a creature's Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores freely unless the ability is used for spellcasting. For example, a Black Pudding stat block could represent a sapient alien if you raise its Intelligence and Charisma to 10 or so. It's usually best to leave its Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution scores alone, as changes to these scores can alter a monster's attack bonus, damage, # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX Armor Class, or Hit Points, which in turn can alter its Challenge Rating. LANGUAGES You can change any or all of the languages the creature knows. You might want to add languages if you've made a creature sapient that wasn't before. You can also add or remove telepathy or other forms of communication. PROFICIENCIES You can give a creature any skill proficiencies you want and give it Expertise if you want it to be very skilled. If you want a creature to be good at hid- ing, give it Expertise in the Stealth skill. If its keen senses make it an excellent tracker or otherwise adept at finding hidden foes, give it Expertise in the Perception skill. (You can also increase its Wisdom, as noted above.) You can also swap a monster's saving throw profi- ciencies. If it has none, you can add one or two. SENSES Blindsight, Darkvision, Tremorsense, and Truesight have no bearing on a creature's Challenge Rating. You can add or remove them freely. SPELLS If a stat block has spells, you can replace any of its spells with a different spell of the same level. Avoid replacing a spell that deals damage with one that doesn't and vice versa. ATTACKS You can freely change the name and flavor of an attack, as well as its damage type. For example, you can turn an ordinary Skeleton into an ice skeleton that deals Cold damage as it accosts characters with a blade of ice or hurls shards of ice at them. # Resistances And Immunities If a creature doesn't have Resistance or Immunity to one or more damage types, you can give it Re- sistance or Immunity to one or two damage types. You can also change the damage type of its existing Resistances and Immunities. TRAITS You can add traits to a creature's stat block to com- municate aspects of the creature's nature. See the Creature Traits list for sample traits. You can also use traits from other stat blocks in the Monster Manual, provided you don't add traits that alter a creature's Hit Points, confer Temporary Hit Points, or change the amount of damage the creature deals to other creatures. # Creature Traits Aversion to Fire. If the creature takes Fire damage, it has Disadvantage on attack rolls and ability checks un- til the end of its next turn. Battle Ready. The creature has Advantage on Initia- tive rolls. Beast Whisperer. The creature can communicate with Beasts as if they shared a common language. Death Jinx. When the creature dies, one random crea- ture within 10 feet of the dead creature is targeted by a Bane spell (save DC 13), which lasts for its full duration. Dimensional Disruption. Disruptive energy extends from the creature in a 30-foot Emanation. Other crea- tures can't teleport to or from a space in that area. Any attempt to do so is wasted. Disciple of the Nine Hells. When the creature dies, its body disgorges a Hostile Imp in the same space. Disintegration. When the creature dies, its body and nonmagical possessions turn to dust. Any magic items it possessed are left behind in its space. Emissary of Juiblex. When the creature dies, its body disgorges a Hostile Ochre Jelly in the same space. Fey Ancestry. The creature has Advantage on saving throws it makes to avoid or end the Charmed condition, and magic can't put it to sleep. Forbiddance. The creature can't enter a residence with- out an invitation from one of its occupants. Gloom Shroud. Imperceptible energy channeled from the Shadowfell extends from the creature in a 20-foot Emanation. Other creatures in that area have Disadvan- tage on Charisma checks and Charisma saving throws. Light. The creature sheds Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. As a Bonus Action, the creature can suppress this light or cause it to return. The light winks out if the crea- ture dies, Mimicry. The creature can mimic Beast sounds and Humanoid voices. A creature that hears the sounds can tell they are imitations with a successful DC 14 Wisdom (Insight) check. Poison Tolerant. The creature has Advantage on saving throws it makes to avoid or end the Poisoned condition. Resonant Connection. The creature has a supernatural connection to another creature or an object and knows the most direct route to it, provided the two are within 1 mile of each other. Siege Monster. The creature deals double damage to objects and structures. Slaad Host. When the creature dies, a Hostile Slaad Tadpole bursts from its innards in the same space. Steadfast. The creature has Immunity to the Frightened condition while it can see an ally within 30 feet of itself. Telepathic Bond. The creature is linked psychically to another creature. While both are on the same plane of existence, they can communicate telepathically with each other. Telepathic Shroud. The creature is immune to any effect that would sense its emotions or read its thoughts, as well as to spells from the school of Divination. As a Bonus Action, the creature can suppress this trait or reactivate it. Ventriloquism. Whenever the creature speaks, it can choose a point within 30 feet of itself; its voice ema- nates from that point. Warrior's Wrath. The creature has Advantage on melee attack rolls against any Bloodied creature. Wild Talent. Choose one cantrip; the creature can cast that cantrip without spell components, using Intelli- gence, Wisdom, or Charisma as the spellcasting ability. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 57 ao. ooo CREATING A MaAGic ITEM The magic items in chapter 7 are but a few of the magic treasures that characters can discover during their adventures. You can modify these magic items or create new ones using the guidelines in this section. Rules for characters crafting magic items are in chapter 7. MODIFYING A Maaic ITEM You can create a new magic item by tweaking one or more existing ones. Suggestions are provided in the sections that follow. # Altered Capabilities One capability can replace a similar one. For ex- ample, a Potion of Climbing could become a Potion of Swimming. # Altered Form You can alter a magic item's form while leaving its properties intact. For example, you can turn a Ring of the Ram into a wand or a Cloak of Protection into some other worn object (such as a circlet) without altering the item's properties. # Altered Damage Types An item that deals damage of one type could instead deal damage of another type. For example, a Flame Tongue sword could deal Lightning damage instead of Fire damage. # Combining Items You can merge the properties of two magic items of the same rarity into a single item, provided no more than one of them requires Attunement. For exam- ple, you could combine the properties of a Helm of Comprehending Languages with those of a Helm of Telepathy into a single helmet. This makes the item more powerful (and probably increases its rarity), but it won't break your game. SPECIAL FEATURES AND SENTIENCE Chapter 7 has rules for giving magic items inter- esting histories, minor properties, quirks, and sentience. CREATING A NEw ITEM If modifying an item doesn't quite fulfill the need, you can create one from scratch. A magic item should either let a character do something they couldn't do before or improve the character's ability to do something they can do already. For example, a Ring of Jumping lets its wearer jump greater distances, thus augmenting what a character can already do. A Ring of the Ram, # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX however, gives a character the ability to deal Force damage. The simpler your approach, the easier it is for a character to use the item in play. Giving the item charges is fine, especially if it has several different abilities, but simply deciding that an item is always active or can be used a fixed number of times per day might be easier to manage. POWER LEVEL If you make an item that lets a character kill what- ever they hit with it, that item will likely unbalance your game. On the other hand, an item whose bene- fit rarely comes into play isn't much of a reward. Use the Magic Item Power by Rarity table as a guide to help you determine how powerful a magic item should be based on its rarity. Macic ITEM Power By RaRITY Rarity Max. Spell Level Max. Bonus Common 1 \_ Uncommon 3 +1 Rare 5 +2 Very Rare 8 +3 Legendary 9 ad Maximum Spell Level. This column of the table in- dicates the highest-level spell effect the item should confer, in the form of a once-per-day or similarly limited property. For example, a Common magic item might confer the benefit of a level 1 spell once per day (or just once if it's consumable). A Rare, Very Rare, or Legendary magic item might allow its possessor to cast a lower-level spell more frequently. Maximum Bonus. If an item delivers a static bonus to AC, attack rolls, saving throws, or ability checks, this column suggests an appropriate bonus based on the item's rarity. ATTUNEMENT Decide whether the item requires a character to be attuned to it to use its properties. Consider the fol- lowing guidelines. Limit Sharing. If having all the characters in a party pass an item around to gain its lasting ben- efits would be disruptive, the item should require Attunement. Limit Stacking. If the item grants a bonus that other items also grant, it's a good idea to require Attunement so characters don't try to collect too many of those items. # Creating A Spell When creating a new spell, use existing ones as ex- amples. Here are some things to consider: Name. The spell must have a unique name. Balance. If the spell is so good that a caster would want to use it all the time, it's probably too power- ful for its level. Identity. Make sure the spell fits with the identity of those who can cast it. Sorcerers and Wizards don't typically cast healing spells, for example. Spell Duration, Range, and Area. A longer dura- tion, greater range, or larger area can make up for a lesser effect, depending on the spell. Utility. Avoid spells that have very limited use, such as one that works only against Oozes. Few charac- ters will bother to learn or prepare such a spell. # Spell Damage For any spell that deals damage, use the Spell Dam- age table to determine approximately how much damage is appropriate given the spell's level. The ta- ble assumes the spell deals half as much damage on a successful saving throw or a missed attack. If your spell doesn't deal damage on a successful save, you can increase the damage by 25 percent. # Ringlerun's Spell Res # Unexpected Oirect # Creates A Flying Gelatinous Cubelet You can use different damage dice than the ones in the table if the average damage is about the same. For example, you could change a cantrip's damage from 1d10 (average 5.5) to 2d4 (average 5), reducing the maximum damage and making an average result more likely. Spett DAMAGE Spell Level One Target Multiple Targets Cantrip 1d10 1d6 1 2d10 2d6 2 3d10 3d6 3 5d10 6d6 4 6d10 7d6 5 7d10 8d6é 6 10d10 11d6 7 11d10 12d6 8 12d10 13d6 9 15d10 16d6 # Healing Spells You can also use the Spell Damage table to deter- mine how many Hit Points a healing spell restores. A cantrip shouldn't provide healing. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 60 No SES. es CURSES AND; # Magical Contagions A curse is a magical burden that lasts for a specified time or until it is ended by some means. A magical contagion is an adverse effect of magical origin that is contagious by definition. The following sections discuss curses and magical contagions in detail. CURSES A curse typically takes one of the forms detailed below. # Bestow Curse The simplest curses are created by the Bestow Curse spell. The effects of such curses are limited and can be ended by the Remove Curse spell. Bestow Curse provides useful benchmarks for gauging the potency of other curses. A curse that lasts for 1 minute equates to a level 3 spell, while one that lasts until dispelled equates to a level 9 spell. # Cursed Creatures Some monsters are associated with curses, whether as part of their origins or due to their ability to spread curses---werewolves being a prime example. You decide how a spell like Remove Curse affects a creature with accursed origins. For example, you might decide that a mummy was created through a curse and it can be destroyed permanently only by casting Remove Curse on its corpse. CuRSED Macic ITEMS Cursed magic items are created deliberately or originate as the result of supernatural events. Such items are detailed in chapter 7. # Narrative Curses A curse might manifest during an adventure when a creature's violation of a taboo warrants supernat- ural punishment, such as breaking a vow, defiling a tomb, or murdering an innocent. Such a curse can have any effects you design, or it might be a custom- ized version of another type of curse discussed in this section. A creature affected by such a curse should know why they're being punished and be able to learn how to end their curse, likely by symbolically righting the wrong they committed. How a spell like Remove Curse affects a curse that's part of your adventure is up to you---the spell might merely sup- press the effects of the curse for a time. Regardless, narrative curses should feel like rare, potent magic rooted in the lore of your campaign. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX ENVIRONMENTAL CURSES Some locations are so suffused with evil that anyone who lingers there is burdened with a curse. Demonic Possession is one example of an environ- mental curse. Demonic Possession. Demonic Possession arises from the chaos and evil of the Abyss and commonly besets creatures that interact with demonic objects or linger in desecrated locations, where demonic spirits await victims. A creature that becomes the target of Demonic Possession must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma sav- ing throw or be possessed by a bodiless demonic entity. Whenever the possessed creature rolls a 1 on a D20 Test, the demonic entity takes control of the creature and determines the creature's behav- ior thereafter. At the end of each of the possessed creature's later turns, the creature makes a DC 15 Charisma saving throw, regaining control of itself on a success. After finishing a Long Rest, a creature with De- monic Possession makes a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a successful save, the effect ends on the creature. A Dispel Evil and Good spell or any magic that removes a curse also ends the effect on it. # Magical Contagions Alchemists, potion brewers, and areas of wild magic are credited with creating the first magical conta- gions. An outbreak of such a contagion can form the basis of an adventure as characters search for a cure and try to stop the contagion's spread. # Rest And Recuperation If a creature infected with a magical contagion spends 3 days recuperating---engaging in no activities that would interrupt a Long Rest---the creature makes a DC 15 Constitution saving throw at the end of the recuperation period. On a suc- cessful save, the creature has Advantage on saving throws to fight off the magical contagion for the next 24 hours.