# CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES # 125 The Arrival Of A Mino Flayer Nautiloio Means Trouble For Any WORLO---AND ADVENTURE FOR THAT WORLO'S HEROES! F ENCOUNTERS ARE THE BUILDING BLOCKS \] of a D&D adventure, then adventures are the building blocks of a D&D campaign, for a campaign is what you get when you string two or more adventures together. A campaign setting is the world in which those adventures take place--- both a backdrop for your adventures and a hotbed of conflicts and personalities that can inspire and drive adventures. # Step-by-step Campaigns Follow these steps to create a campaign: Step 1: Lay Out the Premise. Consider the core conflicts driving the campaign, and choose a setting that reinforces the themes and tone you hope to evoke. Step 2: Draw In the Players. Start your campaign in a memorable way. Determine how the charac- ters get drawn into events and how the characters' goals and ambitions might come into play. Step 3: Plan Adventures. Consider the smaller conflicts that make up the larger conflicts of the campaign, and devise fun quests that help drive the story. Flesh out the antagonists, the important locations, and the elements that link the adven- tures together. Step 4: Bring It to an End. Think about how the campaign might end and what level you expect the characters to be when the campaign wraps up. You might have noticed that these steps are similar to the "Step-by-Step Adventures" list at the start of chapter 4. In many ways, a campaign is just an adventure writ large. In an ongoing campaign, one adventure flows naturally into the next. Later sections of this chapter offer inspiration and advice for each of these four steps. The chapter con- cludes with a campaign example. # Your Campaign Journal At the start of any campaign, there's a buzz of excitement as you and your players look forward to creating a new world together---one full of adven- ture and promise. Every game session is a chance for you to show off more of the campaign setting and deepen your players' investment in it. If your campaign lasts for months or years, sus- taining that high level of excitement---yours as well as your players'---takes effort. An important tool to help you keep interest in the campaign high is a # Chapter 5 CREATING CAMPAIGNS: campaign journal, a collection of notes from past sessions. Use your journal to refresh your memory on events that transpired early in the campaign and bring closure to unresolved conflicts and mysteries. # Keeping A Journal A campaign journal documents the progression of your campaign, from the first game session to the last. Your journal can take whatever form works best for you. It might be a physical notebook; a binder of loose notes, maps, and tracking sheets; a wiki; or a collection of files on your computer. Jour- nal entries are best organized by date or game session. (Some DMs prefer the term "episode" to "game session," but the terms are interchangeable.) A sample Campaign Journal page is provided. Make copies of it, or use it as inspiration for your own journal pages. UsING YouR JOURNAL Use your journal to plan out your next game session (see "Preparing a Session" in chapter 1). Then, when the game session is over, use the journal to capture anything else of importance that might have bear- ing on future sessions, such as the name of an NPC you created on the fly or a critical piece of informa- tion the characters learned. During a game session, you can use your cam- paign journal to quickly recall a piece of infor- mation you've forgotten (such as the name of a character's mule) or to jot down things you want to remember later (such as the name of a tavern). In this way, the journal becomes a living chronicle of the campaign in flight. FORESHADOWING Foreshadowing is a storytelling technique that never goes out of style. Players love it when some- thing happens in a game session that hearkens to some event from an earlier session. Foreshadowing is about planting seeds early so you can reap the rewards later. Having an up-to- date campaign journal makes foreshadowing easier because you can reread your notes from earlier game sessions and identify things that could re- surface in upcoming sessions, giving past events greater weight or a bigger payoff. Consider the fol- lowing example. The characters find the dead body of an unidenti- fied halfling adventurer. A search of the body yields # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS 127 # Campaign Journal SESSION NUMBER: \_\_\_\_\_\_\_\_ SESSION DATE: SESSION/ADVENTURE TITLE: Important events from earlier sessions that might have bearing on this game session: Brief summary of what's planned for this game session: Additional notes: a cameo necklace containing the portrait of another halfling. A character decides to keep the cameo, which was intended as a bit of embellishment. You make a note of it in your journal. Months later, while planning a future session, you flip through the journal and are reminded of the cameo. It in- spires you to plan a chance encounter with another halfling, whom the characters might recognize as the one depicted in the cameo. What happens if the characters return the cameo to this halfling? This halfling could be tied to a bigger plot or have infor- mation that could help the characters resolve some conflict. Suddenly, a minor trinket foreshadows bigger events to come. # Adventure Stockpile Besides tracking each session of your campaign, keep a list of adventure ideas, Even if you don't end up using every adventure idea, having a stockpile will keep you ready for whatever your players throw at you, and you can even borrow pieces of various ideas to incorporate into future adventures. Not every adventure needs to build on earlier plots; a good stand-alone adventure tucked in the middle of a serialized campaign can be a welcome change of pace for you and your players. # Campaign Premise Everything outlined about the story of an adven- ture in chapter 4 is true of a campaign's story as well: a campaign is like a series of comics or TV shows, where each adventure (like an issue of a comic or a TV episode) tells a self-contained story that contributes to the larger story. Just like with an adventure, a campaign's story isn't predetermined, because the actions of the players' characters will influence how the story plays out. # Campaign Characters The characters are the focus of every D&D adventure, and their players are your partners in developing their characters' epic journeys. By working with your players to understand what excites them most, you can craft stories they want to see their characters star in. You can also more effectively draw players into adventure plots (see "Draw In the Players" in chapter 4) if you understand what motivates both them and their characters. # Player Input It's not up to you to create every aspect of a D&D campaign. Players contribute through their char- acters' actions and by directly sharing what they want to see in a campaign. You can learn about your players' preferences in two ways: Direct Input. Ask your players what they want to do in a campaign. Regularly inquire about how they think the campaign is going, what they'd like to experience more of, and what elements they'd like to explore further. After a session concludes and between sessions are great times to ask play- ers for thoughts about the campaign. Indirect Input. The choices a player makes, starting at character creation, can indicate what they want to see in the game. For example, a Rogue player likely wants opportunities for subtlety or skul- duggery, while a Barbarian player likely craves combat. Take note of what encounters players are enthusiastic about, and seek ways to help the play- ers' characters shine. CHARACTER ARCS Like most protagonists in film and literature, D&D adventurers face challenges and change through the experience of overcoming them. By incorporating each character's motivations into your adventures and setting higher stakes through play, you'll help characters grow in exciting ways. You can use the DM's Character Tracker sheet to keep track of key information about each character. See "Getting Players Invested" in this chapter for more ideas. Character Motivations. For each character, think about what motivates them to adventure. Motiva- tions generally fall into the following categories: Goal. A character's goal is a short-term reason for the character to adventure. At the start of a cam- paign, this might be a desire for treasure, a thirst for excitement, or some need from a character's backstory. As characters continue to adventure, they'll find different goals to pursue, such as find- ing a lost relic, honoring an ancestor, avenging a fallen mentor, or defeating a villain. Ambition. A character's ambition is a broad, per- sonal aspiration the character hopes to achieve through a lifetime of adventuring. A character might dream of becoming a legendary knight or bringing peace to their homeland. Ambitions might be unrelated to the character's current goal. Quirks and Whims. Quirks and whims are a char- acter's preferences, impulses, or other traits. They often emerge during play, such as a character's tendency to one-up a rude innkeeper or their oft-expressed fondness for displacer beast fur. Players often reveal their characters' motivations through play. If you're uncertain or a character's motivations seem to have changed, it's OK to ask players for clarification. Family, Friends, and Foes. A character's origin (species and background) implies some amount of backstory, suggesting the character's family and what the character did before becoming an # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS Se a = (, DM'S CHARACTER TRACKER \_ CHARACTER'S NAME: Player'S NAME: | Player MOTIVATION © ACTING © EXPLORING O FIGHTING © INSTIGATING © OPTIMIZING © PROBLEM-SOLVING © SOCIALIZING © STORYTELLING NOTES ON # Player Expectations # Character Details 4 CLASS SUBCLASS LEVEL \| BACKGROUND SPECIES ALIGNMENT i GOALS AND AMBITIONS \| FAMILY, FRIENDS, AND FOES # Quirks And Whims # Magic Items adventurer. Take note of specific background char- acters---friends, foes, family members, and others--- who might appear in the campaign. Should these background characters become im- portant to the campaign, work with the player to develop them in detail. Revealing a character's lost sibling or childhood rival midcampaign should be handled carefully to avoid straining credulity. Make sure a player is comfortable with new developments about their character before introducing them. Character-Focused Adventures. Adventures should occasionally highlight character motivations or elements of their backstory. Here are a few exam- ples of character-focused adventures: - Arival from a character's past shows up to settle a grudge. - Asneaky character puts their skills to the test by leading the rest of the party to conduct a heist. - Acharacter learns the location of a magic item needed to save their hometown. - Aspellcasting character must undertake a trial to join an exclusive group of spellcasters. Any adventure that focuses on a single character should incentivize the whole party to participate--- even if just to help their companion. Avoid focusing adventures on one character too often, and look for opportunities to have character-focused adventures for each character from time to time. Setting New Goals. Characters can change their goals whenever they please, but you can encourage them to do so by giving them significant victories roughly every 5 levels. When characters accomplish their goals, consider the following questions: - How does completing this goal create a new challenge? - How is this victory only part of what the charac- ter wants to achieve? - Who might be upset by the character completing this goal? - What is a reward the character will be excited to receive that also moves them closer to their ambition? Use the answers to these questions to develop new character goals and to inspire further adventures. Building on the Characters' Actions. Sometimes it can be fun to let the players steer the campaign by having their characters' actions dictate future adventures. For example, if the characters buy a tavern using the treasure they've amassed, you can adjust the campaign so that the tavern has a role in future adventures. One adventure might involve a competitor trying to put the characters' tavern out of business. Another might use the tavern as the setting for a murder mystery. # Campaign Conflicts One way to ensure your campaign's longevity is to come up with three compelling conflicts you can create adventures around. Introduce these conflicts early in the campaign. As the campaign unfolds, focus adventures on different conflicts to keep the players' excitement high. Use the Campaign Conflicts tracking sheet to re- cord your campaign's conflicts (with room to add details or notes). A conflict can be as big or as small as you like, and it's nice to have at least one conflict that can be resolved quickly. Each conflict should involve the adventurers against some antagonistic force, though you can also create conflicts between two powerful forces without necessarily knowing which force (if either) the adventurers will align themselves with. The "Flavors of Fantasy" section below provides examples of conflicts that reinforce particular themes. If a conflict reaches a satisfying end before the end of the campaign, create a new conflict to replace it. You can also replace conflicts that don't resonate with your players as well as conflicts you're having trouble building adventures around. CONFLICT ARCS In the same way you think about character arcs over the course of a campaign, think about how each conflict might manifest over the course of the campaign. How do the characters first encounter the conflict? How does the conflict develop over time? What might a climactic ending to that con- flict look like? One helpful way to structure a conflict arc is to use the tiers of play described in chapter 4. Lev- els 5, 11, and 17 represent milestones in character power and capabilities, and they can also be story milestones in the arc of your campaign. The shift from one tier to another is an ideal time to wrap up a campaign conflict and introduce a new one that has a broader reach and represents a greater threat. The threshold of a new tier can also be an opportu- nity for characters to realize the scale of a conflict they've been dealing with---to realize, for example, that the bandits they fought throughout their first four levels are merely puppets of an enemy nation they must confront in the second tier. The "Greyhawk" section in this chapter has examples of conflict arcs. # Flavors Of Fantasy Your D&D campaign might be inspired by a par- ticular flavor of fantasy, several of which are dis- cussed in the sections that follow. Any of these fantastical subgenres can be informed and inspired # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS I3t CAMPAIGN CONFLICTS ---\<\~ } eed Adventurers vs. # Conflict 1 g x: ------ Adventurers vs. # Conflict 2. Adventurers vs. # Conflict 3 # Joy Ang. Calder Moone TM & © 2024 Wizards of the Coast LLC. Permission is granted to photocopy this page for personal use by the cultures, myths, legends, and fantasies of any culture: an epic fantasy campaign could draw on French romances or Chinese wuxia stories, a mythic fantasy campaign could be based on Greek myth or the Epic of Gilgamesh, and so on. # Heroic Fantasy Heroic fantasy features adventurers bringing magic to bear against monstrous threats---the default sub- genre presented in the core D&D rulebooks. Heroic Fantasy Conflicts. Heroic fantasy cam- paigns often revolve around delving into ancient dungeons in search of treasure or to destroy mon- sters or villains. Consider conflicts like these to drive the action of a campaign: Evil Cult. Wicked cultists infiltrate a peaceful realm to free an ancient evil entity trapped in a dungeon. Releasing the entity would surely spell the realm's doom. Fungal Plague. To protect a primeval forest from the encroachment of hunters and settlers, druids unleash a fungal plague that quickly gets out of hand. Old Enemy. An elusive villain who plagued the characters years ago resurfaces, giving the char- acters a chance to finally bring the villain to justice. # On The Backs Of Oragon # From The Of Ws, Heraloing OF A LONG-LOST OYNAST: Gar SWORD AND SORCERY A sword-and-sorcery campaign features a grim world of evil spellcasters and decadent cities, where the protagonists are often motivated more by greed and self-interest than by altruistic virtue. Sword-and-Sorcery Conflicts. In this flavor of cam- paign, magic-users often symbolize the decadence and corruption of civilization, and mages are the classic villains of these settings. Magic items are therefore rare and often dangerous. Consider con- flicts like these to drive the campaign: Evil Adventurers. An evil band of experienced ad- venturers wields power and influence to oppress hapless folk. Evil Weapon. A knight under the influence of a sentient, evil weapon terrorizes a peaceful realm. Cultists worship and protect this weapon, which must be seized and destroyed to end the threat. Forgotten Dynasty. The long-lost seat of a forgot- ten dynasty rises from the sea or the desert sands, and its people launch a campaign of conquest. Epic FANTASY An epic fantasy campaign emphasizes the conflict between good and evil, with the adventurers on the side of good. These heroic characters are driven by a higher purpose than selfish gain or ambition, Characters might struggle with moral quandaries, te 0 134 fighting the evil tendencies within themselves as well as the evil that threatens the world. And the stories of these campaigns often include an element of romance: tragic affairs between star-crossed lov- ers, passion that transcends even death, and chaste adoration between knights and nobles. Epic Fantasy Conflicts. Conflicts like these high- light the themes of an epic fantasy campaign: Apocalypse. A prophecy predicts the end of the world unless the adventurers intervene. Apoca- lypse cultists oppose the characters at every turn. Dragon Tyrant. An evil and powerful dragon moves into the region, upsetting the ecology and demanding tribute from nearby settlements. The Foe Time Forgot. An evil foe believed long dead emerges from the Feywild, alive and well after being lost in time. This foe seeks revenge against the descendants of long-dead enemies. MYTHIC FANTASY A mythic fantasy campaign draws on the themes and stories of ancient myth and legend, from Gil- gamesh to Cu Chulainn. Adventurers attempt mighty feats of legend, aided or hindered by the gods or their agents---and the characters might have divine ancestry themselves. The monsters and villains they face might have a similar origin. The chimera in the dungeon isn't just a random beast but the product of a divine curse. Mythic Fantasy Conflicts. Conflicts like these high- light the themes of a mythic fantasy campaign: Divine Trials. Seeking a gift or favor from the gods, the adventurers undertake a series of trials that lead them to the realms of the gods, where the adventurers can plead their case. Divine Wrath. After a temple is sacked, a vengeful god sends an escalating series of woes upon a kingdom until the temple's relics are returned. Giants. An enormous castle on a cloud settles over the land. The characters can battle the giants liv- ing there or try to broker a lasting peace. # Supernatural Horror If you want to put a horror spin on your campaign, the Monster Manual is full of creatures that suit a storyline of supernatural horror. An essential ele- ment of such a campaign is an atmosphere of dread, created through careful pacing and evocative de- scription. Your players contribute too; they must be willing to embrace the mood. Whether you want to run a full-fledged horror campaign or a single creepy adventure, discuss your plans with the players ahead of time. Horror can be intense and personal, and not everyone is comfort- able with such a game. (The advice on discussing limits under "Ensuring Fun for All" in chapter 1 is particularly important for a horror game.) # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS Supernatural Horror Conflicts. A supernatural horror campaign often features Undead or demonic foes whose evil transcends the merely mortal. Con- sider conflicts like these to drive the campaign: The Faceless Lord. Juiblex, the Faceless Lord, oozes out of the Abyss and into the Underdark. The characters hear from subterranean folk who need help defeating the demon lord and its minions. School of Necromancy. Vampires open a college of necromancy, attracting evil necromancers who need fresh corpses for their studies. An order of vampire hunters seeks the characters' help. Undying Monarch. A venerable monarch clings to power by worshiping Orcus and becoming a lich. INTRIGUE Political intrigue, espionage, sabotage, and similar cloak-and-dagger activities can provide the basis for an exciting campaign. In this kind of game, the characters might care more about skill proficien- cies and making friends in high places than about attack spells and magic weapons. Social interaction takes on greater importance than combat. Make sure your players know ahead of time that you want to run this kind of campaign. Otherwise, a player might create a combat-focused character, only to feel out of place among diplomats and spies. Intrigue Conflicts. Conflicts like these are ripe for an intrigue campaign: Feuding Fiefs. Two fiefs or settlements have been feuding for years. The characters are drawn into the ongoing feud after helping one side. Royal Rivals. The sudden death of a sovereign plunges a kingdom into chaos when the rightful heir is challenged and threatened by rivals. Scheming Adviser. After a monarch takes an inter- est in the characters, they become targets of the monarch's most trusted adviser, who is scheming to become the true power in the realm. MYSTERY A mystery-themed campaign puts the characters in the role of investigators, perhaps traveling from town to town to crack tough cases that local au- thorities can't handle. Such a campaign emphasizes puzzles and problem-solving in addition to combat prowess. An adventure composed of nothing but puzzles can become frustrating, so be sure to mix up the kinds of encounters you present. Mystery Conflicts. A mystery might set the stage for the whole campaign. The characters might un- cover clues to this mystery from time to time, while individual adventures might be only tangentially related to it. Consider conflicts like these for a mys- tery campaign: Criminal Syndicate. A many-headed criminal syn- dicate seeks economic and political power. The syndicate has spies everywhere, including among the adventurers' families or friends. Shape-Shifting Assassins. A secret association of doppelgangers or other shape-shifters slowly assassinates prominent figures one by one. To Catch a Thief. An extraordinary thief steals only the most valuable jewelry and works of art. The characters might become a target of the thief when they acquire a priceless treasure. SWASHBUCKLING The swashbuckling adventures of pirates and mus- keteers make for a dynamic campaign in which dashing, charming heroes weave their way through palace intrigues and leap from balconies onto waiting horses to escape dogged pursuers. In a swash- buckling campaign, the characters typically spend a lot of time in cities, in royal courts, and aboard sea- faring vessels. Nevertheless, the heroes might end up in classic dungeon situations, such as escaping from a prison cell block or searching storm sewers to find a villain's hidden chambers. Swashbuckling Conflicts. Conflicts like these high- light the themes of a swashbuckling campaign: Inherited Antagonists. A character inherits a magic item from a deceased relative, unaware that this relative's enemies are after the item. Pirates and Privateers. A new monarch cracks down on piracy by commissioning privateers and naval officers to hunt pirate ships. The Waking Deep. A monstrous horror slumbering in the depths of the ocean stirs, driving minions such as sahuagin, merrows, or dragon turtles to attack seafaring vessels. WAR A campaign focused on warfare centers on heroes whose actions turn the tide of battle. The charac- ters carry out specific missions: capture a magical standard that empowers undead armies, gather reinforcements to break a siege, or cut through the enemy's flank to reach a demonic commander. The party might also support the larger army by hold- ing a strategic location until reinforcements arrive, killing enemy scouts, or cutting off supply lines. Information-gathering and diplomatic missions can supplement combat-oriented adventures. War Conflicts. Conflicts like these highlight the themes and flavor of a war campaign: Freedom Fighters. Poorly armed and disorganized subjects of a tyrant revolt. Invaders. A militaristic nation invades its benevo- lent neighbors. Pawns in a Game. A war rages on for decades, its original cause all but forgotten. The people caught up in it strive to find meaning and purpose in a bleak and violent world. # The Bolo Adventurer Murlynd Was # Visited Many Worlds Ano Has A Fononess FOR SIK\* SHOOTERS AND TALKING CLOCKS CROSSING THE STREAMS Deep in D&D's roots are elements of science fiction and science fantasy as well as a wide-ranging col- lection of fantasy inspiration, and your campaign might draw on those sources as well. You can send your characters hurtling through a magic mirror to Lewis Carroll's Wonderland, put them aboard a ship traveling between the stars, or set your campaign in a far-future world where laser weapons (see "Fire- arms and Explosives" in chapter 3) and Wands of Magic Missile exist side by side. Crossing the Streams Conflicts. Conflicts like these create opportunities for crossing the streams: Beyond the Magic Mirror. A mysterious mirror in a strange dungeon is a portal into a different world where whimsical tales unfold---or perhaps some version of the modern world. Gamma World. The characters inhabit a post- apocalyptic wasteland that is largely medieval in feel, but isolated outposts still hold futuristic tech- nology from before the cataclysm. Invaders from Wildspace. Spaceships land on the characters' world and disgorge hostile creatures armed with advanced technology. # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS # 135 136 = = # Campaign Setting Just like an adventure's setting (as described in chapter 4), a campaign setting is an essential part of a campaign's premise, shaping the kinds of stories that unfold there. As the DM, you have two options when choosing a campaign setting: - Use a published campaign setting. - Create your own campaign setting. Whether you create your own campaign setting or use a published one, the world of your game is always your own. You can customize it to suit your tastes and those of your players. USING A PUBLISHED SETTING One advantage of using a published campaign set- ting is that much of the world-building is done for you. However, this means your players might know as much about the setting as you do. You can get around this by changing key aspects of the setting to better serve your needs, which has the added benefit of challenging your players' expectations. The D&D Settings table describes several estab- lished campaign settings. D&D Settincs Setting Description Dark Sun the gods. Dragonlance War of the Lance. Eberron ens lasting peace. Exandria Critical Role. Forgotten Realms CREATING YOUR Own SETTING One advantage of creating your own world is it can be whatever you want it to be. Your players will never know more about the world than you do, which can be both a comfort to you and a source of wonder to your players. Moreover, you don't need to memorize any source material about the campaign setting, other than what you create for yourself. Whether you create a setting from scratch or borrow elements from established settings, the result needs to resonate with your players. As you create your world, ask your players what settings and genres they enjoy, then use those sources for inspi- ration to create compelling locations, memorable inhabitants, exciting conflicts, and an internal logic that will resonate with your players. Five Questions to Consider. As you contemplate a new campaign setting, think about your answers to the following questions: What's Your Campaign Setting Called? Choose an evocative name for your setting. It can be a word or phrase that reflects the theme and tone of the game, or just a made-up name that sounds cool to you. Keep a running list of ideas as you decide on other aspects of your setting. Heroes make their mark on a postapocalyptic world defiled by magic and forsaken by The forces of good battle the evil queen of dragons and her armies in the world-shaking In the aftermath of a deadly war, magically advanced nations rebuild as a cold war threat- Heroes make names for themselves in the world made popular by the streaming show Larger-than-life heroes and villains struggle to determine the fate of the world as they explore the ruins and dungeons of fallen kingdoms and long-forgotten empires. As tensions rise among warring nations, heroes plunder dungeons to gain the magic and Sigil, the City of Doors, is where heroes begin to explore the wonders of the D&D multi- In a world-spanning city, ten disparate factions draw heroes into a web of adventure and Travel among the stars on a spelljamming ship, and visit worlds floating in the majestic Greyhawk might they need to defeat the growing forces of evil. Planescape verse and its many planes of existence. Ravenloft Heroes are drawn into the gloomy Domains of Dread---cursed realms ruled by evil lords---and must find a means of escape. Ravnica *danger. Spelljammer oceans of Wildspace. Strixhaven* Strixhaven, a school of magic, serves as a hub of learning and adventure. Theros\* \*This setting is based on a Magic: The Gathering world, # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS Heroic destinies wait to be fulfilled in this setting inspired by the myths of ancient Greece. What Factions and Organizations Are Prom- inent? Nations, temples, guilds, orders, secret societies, and colleges shape the social fabric of the setting. What organizations or societal groups play an important part in your setting? Which ones might be involved in the lives of player char- acters as patrons, allies, or enemies? What orga- nizations can characters join, becoming part of something larger than themselves? How Common Is Magic? Spellcasters and magic item shops might be common, rare, or practically nonexistent in your world. How readily available are spells such as Lesser Restoration, Raise Dead, and Teleportation Circle? Is magic so widespread that it's part of daily life, or so rare that it con- jures all sorts of superstitions? What Mysteries Does the World Hold? Every campaign setting has mysteries: a fabled land across the sea, a grim forest hiding a terrible se- cret, restless spirits haunting a ruined keep for reasons unknown, an ancient dungeon built for a forgotten purpose, and so on. Dream up as many mysteries as you wish---you never know which ones will seize your players' imaginations and be- come central to the campaign---and record them in your campaign journal. What Roles, If Any, Do the Gods Play? What greater gods, lesser gods, and quasi-deities are present or worshiped in your world? If there are gods, how involved are they in the world? Are they distant and detached beings, or do they appear before their worshipers and meddle in mortal affairs? # Campaign Start With your campaign journal in hand and the basic premise of your campaign (characters, conflicts, and setting) in mind, it's time to consider how to be- gin the campaign. # Session Zero At the start of a campaign, you and your players can run a special session---called session zero because it comes before the first session of play---to establish expectations, share ideas, and discuss house rules, with the goal of ensuring the game is a fun experi- ence for everyone involved. The "Ensuring Fun for All" section in chapter 1 covers some of the most important groundwork you need to establish at the start of a new campaign. Often session zero includes building characters together. As the DM, you can help players during character creation by advising them on which options best suit the campaign. # Character Creation When players are choosing their characters' classes and origins, you can restrict options that are un- suitable for the campaign. Encourage the players to choose different classes so that the adventuring party has a range of abili- ties. It's less important that the party include mul- tiple backgrounds or species; sometimes it's fun to play an all-Dwarf party or a troupe of adventuring Entertainers. The origins the players choose define who their characters were before becoming adventurers. Think about how the characters' backgrounds might inform adventures in your campaign. For ex- ample, if a player chooses the Criminal background, help the player flesh out their character's criminal past, and use that information when building rele- vant storylines into the larger campaign. Starting Level. What level are the characters when they start? Many D&D campaigns start the characters at level 1. If you want the characters to be a bit more resilient and your players are expe- rienced, start the campaign at level 3 instead. (See the Player's Handbook for rules on starting at higher levels.) # Bringing The Party Together During session zero, help the players come up with explanations for how their characters know each other and have some sort of history together, how- ever brief that history might be. To get a sense of the party's relationships, here are some questions you can ask the players as they create characters: - Are any of the characters related to each other? - What keeps the characters together as a party? - What does each character like most about each member of the party? - Does the group have a patron---an individual or organization that points them toward their adventures? If the players are having trouble coming up with a story for how their characters met, you can suggest the following options. Bonding Event. Some bonding event (such as a wedding, a festival, or a funeral) brings the charac- ters together, whereupon they quickly discover a shared sense of purpose. Happenstance. Someone puts out a call for ad- venturers to complete a quest, and the characters answer the call. Alternatively, all the characters could meet by accident, only to discover they're headed to the same place, or they could find them- selves trapped together. Mutual Acquaintance. The characters are introduced to one another by a mutual NPC # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS 137 ET = a in acquaintance whom they all trust. This shared ac- quaintance could serve as a patron for the party--- perhaps a representative of an organization (an academy, a criminal syndicate, a guild, a military force, or a religious order), a politically powerful person (an aristocrat or even a sovereign), or a mag- ical creature like a sphinx or a dragon. Shared History. The characters grew up in the same place and have known one another for years. Despite their different backgrounds and training, they're already good friends. Tavern Gathering. The characters meet in a tavern over mugs of ale and decide to embark on a life of adventure together---a tried and true trope! # Setting The Stage Session zero is a great time to share basic informa- tion about the campaign with your players. Such information typically includes the following: Starting Location Details. Your players need basic information about the place where the characters are starting, such as the name of the settlement, important locations in and around it, and prom- inent NPCs they'd know about (see "Starting Location"). Key Events. Describe any current or past events that help frame the campaign. For example, the campaign might start on the heels of a great war or on the day of a festival. Describing key events helps set the mood and prepare players for up- coming adventures. House Rules. If you're using any house rules (as discussed in chapter 2), or adopting any of the variant rules presented in this or any other book, let your players know about them. Remember, you'll always know more about your campaign world than the players do. Having spent all their lives in this world, though, the characters also know more than their players do. Fill in the basics of what the characters should know anytime that information matters to their adventures. # Starting Location Begin your campaign in a location you can detail, such as a village, a neighborhood in a larger city, an outpost, or a roadside tavern. Be prepared to give players enough information about that loca- tion to help them figure out what ties, if any, their characters have to it. Once you have this campaign hub fleshed out, create one or two local attractions that might serve as adventure locations, such as a haunted house on the outskirts of town or a dun- geon complex tucked in the nearby hills. If you're using a published campaign setting, pick any location in that setting and develop it as you like. A published setting or adventure might give you all the details you need. The Free City of Grey- hawk, described later in this chapter, is an ideal starting location and illustrates the kinds of things to consider as you detail a starting location. If you're building your own setting, start small by detailing only this starting area. The rest of your setting can remain undeveloped for now. Don't spend too much time fleshing out the geopolitical landscape of your world or locations the adventur- ers aren't likely to visit right away; save those fun tasks for when you and your players have a better sense of where the campaign is headed. First ADVENTURE If you're using a published adventure to launch your campaign, use the character hooks in that ad- venture to bring the characters from their starting location to the adventure's action. Many campaigns begin with a published adventure and then develop organically as the characters explore beyond the scope of the adventure. If you're creating your own adventure for the start of your campaign, refer to the advice in chap- ter 4. Keep the first adventure relatively short and simple, allowing plenty of time for the characters to get to know each other as the players roleplay. What's most important is that they begin to feel like an adventuring party and get comfortable with their abilities. The full scope of the campaign can unfold to them later. # Plan Adventures A D&D campaign is like a garden. Each new adventure plants new seeds in the garden, which requires regular tending lest it run wild. Over time, your campaign will grow and flourish in ways you expected and in ways that will surprise you. You might need to weed out elements that aren't reso- nating with your players while planting new ele- ments to tantalize them. Most D&D campaigns grow organically, rather than having all their elements set in stone from the get-go. From time to time, the characters' deci- sions will require you to improvise and create new campaign elements on the fly. For example, a new location might need to be developed to address the needs of the unfolding story, or certain NPCs might need fleshing out at a moment's notice. Other parts of this book, such as the "Nonplayer Characters" and "Settlements" sections in chapter 3, can help you expand your campaign quickly.