# CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 73 74 # Gods And Other Powers Different deities rule the various aspects of the cos- mos and mortal life, sometimes cooperating with each other, sometimes competing. People gather in public shrines to worship gods of life and wisdom or meet in hidden places to venerate gods of deception or destruction. # Divine Rank The divine beings of the multiverse are often cat- egorized according to their relative cosmic power. Some gods who are worshiped on multiple worlds have a different rank on each world, depending on their influence there. Greater deities are generally the oldest gods of a pantheon, responsible (at least in myth) for creating or parenting the other gods. Their provinces are major areas of nature and mortal life, such as agriculture, the sun, and death. Greater deities are ul- timately beyond mortal understanding, and they're often known by different names across regions, cultures, and worlds. Having no fixed appearance or gender, they can assume whatever forms they like. Occasionally these deities manifest and perform mythic deeds among mortals. Lesser deities are typically described in myth as the creations, children, or servitors of the greater deities. They govern narrower provinces, such as ---\_\_ a Buitp Your Own PANTHEON Most of the published D&D settings described in chapter 5 have their own pantheons of gods. If you're creating your own setting, you can use the list of Greyhawk gods in chapter 5 or build your own pantheon. A simple way to build a basic pantheon is to create one god for each of the Outer Planes de- scribed in chapter 6, except for the Nine Hells (ruled by the archdevil Asmodeus) and the Abyss (the domain of demons). So Arborea might be the domain of a god who is patron of the arts, celebrated at great feasts, while Gehenna's deity might be a greedy, vengeful god worshiped by people of the same bent. If you prefer, you can also put multiple deities on the same plane, so Arcadia might be home to twin gods who are pa- trons of merchants and smiths. Alternatively, you might decide that your world has only one god (who might be viewed differ- ently by various sects or religions) or one good god and one evil god. Or your world might be alive with spirits great and small, from lesser river spirits to the godlike spirits who inhabit great mountains. Impersonal forces and philosophies can also fill the role of gods in a campaign. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX the activities of mortal life or limited aspects of the natural world. They share the fundamentally ineffa- ble nature of greater gods, but they are more likely to manifest in mortal realms. Quasi-deities have a divine origin, but they don't receive or answer prayers. They are still immensely powerful beings, and in theory, they could ascend to godhood if they amass enough worshipers. Quasi-deities fall into the following subcategories: Demigods are divine beings with mortal origin. Some were born mortal and attained godhood, while others were born from the union of a deity and a mortal. Their mortal parentage makes demi- gods the weakest quasi-deities. Titans are the creations of deities. They might be manufactured on a divine forge, born from the blood spilled by a god, or otherwise brought about through divine will or substance. Some titans, in- cluding krakens and the tarrasque, appear in the Monster Manual. Vestiges are deities who have lost nearly all their worshipers and are considered dead from a mortal perspective. Esoteric rituals can sometimes con- tact vestiges and draw on their latent power, # Home Plane And Alignment Gods aren't defined by mortal conceptions of align- ment, and different mortal worshipers might in- terpret a god's behavior and teachings through the lens of different alignments. That said, gods tend to live on the Outer Planes that most closely match their general alignment tendencies, so it's safe to assume that the teachings of a god who resides in Pandemonium (a plane of rampant chaos and evil), encourage behavior that is Chaotic Evil, while a god who resides in Elysium (the plane of pure good) en- courages Neutral Good behavior. People can worship a god without obeying that god's tenets or conforming to the god's presumed alignment. People from all walks of life might par- ticipate in the annual festival of innocent mischief associated with a trickster god---even people whose alignment is generally lawful and opposed to the trickster's teachings. To stave off disease, goodhearted people might make offerings to appease the wrath of a god associated with plague. Even Cleric characters don't need to have any particular align- ment to serve their gods. GODs AND DIVINE MAGIC Divine magic---which includes the spells cast by Clerics, Druids, Paladins, and Rangers---is mediated through beings and forces that are categorized as divine. These can include gods but also include the primal forces of nature, the beneficent power of ancestral spirits, the sacred weight of a Paladin's cath, and impersonal principles or entities such as Fate or the order of the universe. These beings and forces grant characters the power to wield the magic of their planar domains. For game purposes, wielding divine power isn't dependent on the gods' ongoing approval or the strength of a character's devotion. The power is a gift offered to a select few; once given, it can't be rescinded. That said, characters' relationships with the di- vine forces they access to wield their magic, much like Warlocks' relationships with their patrons, are ripe for exploration. A Cleric might accompany every casting of a spell with a litany of complaints directed at the gods. The Paladin class description in the Player's Handbook offers some suggestions for how a player might roleplay a situation where their Paladin has broken their oath. You can also decide how NPCs react to a character whose behavior doesn't square with the ideals implied by the Holy Symbol the character wears. # Divine Knowledge The Commune spell allows its caster to ask a deity (or an agent of the god) yes-or-no questions and receive correct information, and other spells of the Divination school have similar effects. As the Com- mune spell description states, gods aren't necessarily omniscient. But they are tremendously knowledge- able, particularly with regard to their particular areas of influence. A sea god can be reasonably ex- pected to know anything that has happened in or on a sea, for example, and a martial god knows details about wars. Gods can reliably predict the future, at least in the short term (hence their ability to answer spells such as Augury and Divination). And some gods might be unwilling to reveal their ignorance, choosing to give an unclear answer rather than ad- mit that they don't know the truth. # Divine Intervention In some campaigns, gods are fond of meddling in mortal affairs, and heroes sometimes call on the gods for aid beyond what divine magic ordinarily provides, The gods sometimes also send dreams, omens, or emissaries to direct mortals along a certain path. Keep these two principles in mind to guide your use of divine intervention in your campaign: Don't Eliminate Character Choice. The gods can tell characters to do things and even threaten to punish them if they don't do things, but the gods can't control mortal actions. Don't Eliminate Risk and Danger. The interven- tion of a god should never guarantee success or victory, nor should a god's interference portend immediate defeat. Gods can act to change the bal- ance of an encounter or offer an avenue of escape, but they count on mortal heroes to act like heroes. With those principles in mind, you might have gods intervene in dire situations in one of these ways: Blessings. A god might bestow a Blessing (see "Supernatural Gifts" in this chapter) to help a character in need. Emissaries. A god might send a Celestial, a Fiend, or some other kind of emissary to aid a character with information, guidance, or combat. Miracles. As the simplest form of miracle, a god can produce the effect of any spell that devotees of that god might cast (typically Cleric or Druid spells). But a god's direct intervention can take any form you choose, often reflecting the god's nature. # Creating Religions A list of gods is a good starting point, and it can be sufficient to get a campaign started. But you can add more depth to your campaign world by fleshing out more details of religious belief and practice. MYTHS Stories about the gods explore their relationships with each other, with the natural world, and with the realm of mortals. Myths might describe familial relationships among the gods, deeds of creation, past interactions with mortals, or battles between gods and other cosmic forces. Given the incompre- hensible nature of the gods, these myths might not actually reveal anything about the gods, but they certainly describe people's understanding of their own place in relation to the gods. # Religious Practice People honor multiple gods of a pantheon in differ- ent circumstances. A person might burn incense to a hearth or family deity at a kitchen altar in the morning, pray to a deity of the hunt while hunting in the afternoon, and join a communal harvest feast at the temple of an agricultural deity in the evening. Cities and large towns can host numerous tem- ples dedicated to individual gods important to the community, while smaller settlements might have a single shrine devoted to any gods the locals re- vere. Temples and shrines outside settlements often mark places where a god (or the manifestation of a god) appeared or caused a miracle. These sites can become the focus of pilgrims who travel long distances to partake in the holy power assumed to linger there. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 75 76 HAZARDS The Player's Handbook describes common hazards that adventurers encounter, such as falling and dehydration. This section details some unusual hazards you can add to a location to make it more challenging. # Severity And Level Each hazard in this section is designated as a nui- sance or as deadly for characters of certain levels. A nuisance hazard is unlikely to seriously harm characters of the indicated levels, whereas a deadly hazard can grievously damage characters of the indicated levels. Use caution when introducing a hazard to charac- ters of a level lower than the hazard's level range. A hazard that is a nuisance at one level range could be deadly to characters in the next-lower range. # Example Hazards Hazards are presented in alphabetical order. Brown MOLD Deadly Hazard (Levels 5-10) or Nuisance Hazard (Levels 11-16) Brown mold resembles a furry, light-brown carpet. This fungus feeds on warmth, drawing heat from anything around itself. One patch of brown mold covers a 10-foot square, and the temperature within 30 feet of it is always frigid. When a creature enters a space within 5 feet of the mold for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there, the creature makes a DC 12 Consti- tution saving throw, taking 22 (4d10) Cold dam- age on a failed save or half as much damage ona successful one. Brown mold has Immunity to Fire damage, and any source of fire brought within 5 feet of it causes the mold to instantly expand across a surface and toward the fire, creating a new patch that covers a 10-foot square. A patch of brown mold exposed to an effect that deals any amount of Cold damage is destroyed instantly. FIREBALL FuNGuS Deadly Hazard (Levels 5-10) A fireball fungus is a Small, inanimate mushroom that can grow anywhere fungi are found in abun- dance. Its luminous, orange cap sheds Bright Light in a 15-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 15 feet. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX a oo eee ae ere \[ee \_ A fireball fungus has AC 10, HP 6, and Immunity to Psychic damage. When it drops to O Hit Points, the fungus explodes as if a Fireball spell (save DC 15) had been centered on it. At Higher Levels. The explosion of a fireball fun- gus causes other fireball fungi in the area of effect to explode as well. You can scale the hazard for higher levels by adding one additional fungus at lev- els 11-16 or three additional fungi at levels 17-20. GREEN SLIME Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Acidic green slime devours flesh, organic material, and metal on contact. Bright green, wet, and sticky, it clings to walls, floors, and ceilings in patches. One patch of green slime covers a 5-foot square. Green slime has Blindsight with a range of 30 feet, and it drops from walls and ceilings when it detects movement below itself. Beyond that, it can't move. A creature aware of the slime's presence can avoid being struck by it with a successful DC 10 Dexterity saving throw. A creature that comes in contact with green slime takes 5 (1d10) Acid damage. The creature takes the damage again at the start of each of its turns until the slime is scraped off (requiring an action) or destroyed. Against wood or metal, green slime deals 11 (2d10) Acid damage each round, and any nonmagi- cal wood or metal item used to scrape off the green slime is destroyed. Direct sunlight or any amount of Cold, Fire, or Radiant damage destroys a patch of green slime. INFERNO Deadly Hazard (Levels 5-10) or Nuisance Hazard (Levels 11-16) Whenever an uncontrolled fire spreads, it can cre- ate an inferno that quickly engulfs creatures, ob- jects, and vegetation. An inferno consists of at least four contiguous 10-foot Cubes of fire. Each of the inferno's 10-foot Cubes can be doused with 10 gallons of water. Ex- posure to a strong wind for 1 minute causes the inferno to grow, adding 1d4 new 10-foot Cubes to its volume. An inferno deprived of fuel burns itself out after 1d10 minutes. An inferno damages any vegetation or object that isn't being worn or carried that it touches, dealing 22 (4d10) Fire damage immediately and again at the end of each minute. Any creature that enters the inferno for the first time on a turn or starts its turm there takes 22 (4d10) Fire damage and is burning. a PorIsonous GAs Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Poisonous gas is usually encountered in an enclosed space, such as a sewer or sealed tomb. The gas fills as much space as it can, up to a maximum of ten 10- foot Cubes. The transparent gas carries a foul odor. The gas is continuously or periodically replenished by some natural or magical source, though a strong wind disperses the gas for 1 minute. Any creature that enters poisonous gas for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there makes 2 DC 12 Constitution saving throw, taking 5 (1d10) Poison damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Creatures in the gas also have Disadvantage on Death Saving Throws. At Higher Levels. You can scale the hazard for higher levels by increasing the Poison damage and the save DC, as shown in the following table. Levels Poison Damage Save DC 5-10 11 (2d10) 14 11-16 22 (4d10) 16 17-20 55 (10d10) 18 SHEILA DISCOVERS THAT GREEN SLIME iS MORE # Dangerous Than It Looks QUICKSAND PIT Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) A quicksand pit is 10 feet deep and covers the ground in a 10-foot square. A creature that enters the area sinks 1d4 + 1 feet into the quicksand and has the Restrained condition. At the start of each of the creature's turns, it sinks another 1d4 feet. As long as the creature isn't completely submerged in quicksand, it can take an action to try to escape, do- ing so with a successful Strength (Athletics) check (DC 10 plus the number of feet the creature has sunk into the quicksand). A creature that is com- pletely submerged in quicksand has Total Cover and the Blinded condition and risks suffocation. A creature can pull another creature within its reach out of a quicksand pit by taking an action and succeeding on a Strength (Athletics) check (DC 5 plus the number of feet the creature has sunk into the quicksand). At Higher Levels. You can scale this hazard for higher levels by making the pit deeper and increas- ing the number of feet a creature sinks at the start of each of its turns, as shown in the following table. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 77 78 EE ------E See ee Levels Pit Depth Sinking Rate 5-10 15 feet 1d6 feet 11-16 20 feet 1d8 feet 17-20 30 feet 1d10 feet RAZORVINE Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Razorvine is a plant that grows in wild tangles and hedges. It also clings to the sides of buildings and other surfaces as ivy does. A 10-foot-high, 10-foot- wide, 5-foot-thick wall or hedge of razorvine has AC 11; HP 25; and Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Psychic damage. When a creature comes into contact with razor- vine for the first time on a turn, the creature must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or take 5 (1d10) Slashing damage from the bladelike thorns. RIVER Styx Nuisance Hazard (Levels 11-16) The River Styx courses through the Lower Planes. Tasting or touching its waters can shatter a crea- ture's intellect and personality, as well as strip away its memories. Certain Fiends are immune to the river's effects. Unless immune to the river's effects, a creature that drinks from the Styx, enters the river, or starts its turn in the river makes a DC 20 Intelligence saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 19 (3d12) Psychic damage and can't cast spells or take the Magic action for 30 days. An affected creature can drink from the Styx and swim in its waters without suffering any additional effects. The effect can be ended only by the Greater Res- toration, Heal, or Wish spell. If the effect isn't ended after 30 days, the effect becomes permanent, and the creature loses all its memories. At that point, nothing short of a Wish spell or divine intervention can undo the effect. Water taken from the River Styx loses its potency after 24 hours, becoming a harmless, foul-tasting liquid. Arcanaloths, night hags, and other fell creatures might know rituals that can prolong the water's potency, at your discretion. ROCKSLIDE Deadly Hazard (Levels 1-4) When a rockslide occurs, every creature in its path makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 11 (2d10) Bludgeoning dam- age, has the Prone condition, and moves with the # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX rockslide. On a successful save, a creature takes half as much damage only. When the rockslide stops, its space becomes Diffi- cult Terrain, and all Prone creatures in its space are buried under rocks and debris. A creature buried in this way has the Restrained condition and has Total Cover. As an action, a creature can try to crawl out from under the rock pile. If the creature succeeds on a DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check, it is no lon- ger Restrained; instead, it has the Prone condition and is atop the rock pile. If the check fails, the crea- ture remains buried and gains 1 Exhaustion level. A creature that has neither the Incapacitated nor the Restrained condition can spend 1 minute freeing another creature buried by the rockslide. At Higher Levels. You can scale this hazard for higher levels by increasing the Bludgeoning damage as follows: 22 (4d10) at levels 5-10, 55 (10d10) at levels 11-16, and 99 (18d10) at levels 17-20. Vicious VINE Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Vicious vines are animated by magic. They often cling to doorways, archways, walls, and statuary. Until a vicious vine moves, there's nothing to distin- guish it from an inanimate vine. Each vicious vine has AC 11; HP 16; and Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Psychic damage. When a creature enters a space within 5 feet of the vine for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there, the vine tries to coil around that creature. The target must succeed on a DC 12 Dexterity sav- ing throw or have the Grappled condition (escape DC 12). While Grappled in this way, the target takes 5 (1d10) Necrotic damage from the vine's life-draining thorns at the start of each of the tar- get's turns. The vine can grapple only one creature at a time. As an Influence action, a character under the ef- fect of a Speak with Plants spell or similar magic can try to persuade the vine to release its victim, doing so with a successful DC 10 Charisma (Persuasion) check. A creature released by the vine in this way won't be attacked by that vine again for the next 24 hours. At Higher Levels. You can scale the hazard for higher levels by increasing the Necrotic damage, the save DC, and the escape DC, as shown in the following table. Levels Necrotic Damage Save/Escape DC 5-10 11 (2410) 14 11-16 22 (4d10) 16 17-20 55 (10d10) 18 WHEN CAUGHT INA WEB, It'S BEST TO GET OUT # Before The Spider Shows Up CZ WEBS Nuisance Hazard (Levels 1-4) Giant spiders weave thick, sticky webs across pas- sages and at the bottom of pits to snare prey. These web-filled areas are Difficult Terrain. A creature that enters a web-filled area for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there must suc- ceed on a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw or have the Restrained condition. As an action, a creature Re- strained by the webs can try to escape from them, doing so with a successful DC 12 Strength (Athlet- ics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. Each 10-foot Cube of webs has AC 10; HP 15; Vul- nerability to Fire damage; and Immunity to Pierc- ing, Poison, and Psychic damage. YELLOW MOLD Deadly Hazard (Levels 1-4) or Nuisance Hazard (Levels 5-10) Yellow mold grows in dark places, and one patch covers a 5-foot square. If touched, the mold ejects a cloud of spores that fills a 10-foot Cube. Any crea- ture in that area must succeed on a DC 15 Constitu- tion saving throw or take 11 (2d10) Poison damage and have the Poisoned condition for 1 minute. While Poisoned in this way, the creature takes 5 (1d10) Poison damage at the start of each of its turns. The creature repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Direct sunlight or any amount of Fire damage destroys a patch of yellow mold. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX # Marks Of Prestige Sometimes the most memorable reward for adven- turers is the prestige they acquire throughout a realm. Their adventures often earn them fame and power, allies and enemies, and titles the adventur- ers can pass on to their descendants. This section details the most common marks of prestige that ad- venturers might acquire during a campaign. The best rewards in an adventure are directly re- lated to the circumstances of the adventure. For ex- ample, if a merchant hires the characters to retrieve a family heirloom from a long-abandoned tower, the merchant might give the deed to the tower as a reward. FORTIFICATIONS A fortification is a reward usually given to seasoned adventurers who demonstrate unwavering fealty to a powerful political figure or ruling body, such as a monarch, a knighthood, or a council of wizards. A fortification can be anything from a fortress in the heart of a city to a provincial keep on the border- lands. While the fortification is for the characters to govern as they see fit, the land on which it sits remains the property of the crown or local ruler. Should the characters prove disloyal or unworthy of the gift, they can be asked or forced to relinquish custody of the fortification. In that respect, the fortification is different from the characters' Bastions (described in chapter 8). However, you can also use Queen YoLanoe of CEcene is # Grateful For Adventurers' Aid the gift of a fortification as a pretext for the charac- ters acquiring their Bastions. The individual bequeathing the fortification might offer to pay its maintenance costs for one or more months, after which the characters inherit that re- sponsibility. The type of fortification determines its maintenance costs, as shown in the Maintenance Costs table. MAINTENANCE Costs Fortification Cost per Day Fortified outpost or watchtower 50 GP Keep or small castle 100 GP Large castle or fortress 400 GP LETTERS OF RECOMMENDATION A benefactor might provide adventurers with a let- ter of recommendation rather than payment. Such a letter is usually enclosed in a handsome folio, case, or scroll tube for safe transport, and it usually bears the signature and seal of whoever wrote it. A letter of recommendation from a person of im- peccable reputation can grant adventurers access to NPCs whom they would otherwise have trouble meeting, such as a duke, duchess, viceroy, or mon- arch. Moreover, carrying such a recommendation on one's person establish a baseline of trust with local authorities, A letter of recommendation is worth only as much as the reputation of the person who wrote it and of- fers no benefit where its writer holds no sway. MEDALS Although they are often fashioned from gold and other precious materials, medals have an even greater symbolic value to those who award and re- ceive them. Medals are typically awarded by politi- cal figures for acts of heroism, and wearing a medal is usually enough to earn the respect of those who understand its significance. Different acts of heroism can warrant different kinds of medals. The king of Breland (in the Eber- ron setting) might award a Royal Badge of Valor (shaped like a shield and made of ruby and elec- trum) to adventurers for defending Brelish citizens. The Golden Bear of Breland (a medal made of gold and shaped in a likeness of a bear's head, with gems for eyes) might be reserved for adventurers who prove their allegiance to the Brelish Crown. A medal doesn't offer a specific in-game benefit to one who wears it, but it can affect dealings with NPCs. For example, a character who displays the Golden Bear of Breland is regarded as a hero of the people within the kingdom of Breland. Outside Breland, the medal carries far less weight, except among allies of Breland's king. # Parcels Of Land A parcel of land usually comes with a letter from a local ruler, affirming that the land has been granted as a reward for some service. Such land usually re- mains the property of the local ruler or ruling body but is lent to a character with the understanding that it can be taken away, especially if the charac- ter's loyalty is ever called into question. Characters who receive a parcel of land are free to build on it and are expected to safeguard it. They may yield the land as part of an inheritance, but they can't sell or trade it without permission from the local ruler or ruling body. If a character already has a Bastion (see chapter 8), the parcel of land might surround the Bastion or be close to it. Parcels of land make fine rewards for adventurers who are looking for a place to settle or who have family or a personal investment in the region where the land is located. # Special Favors A reward might be a favor the characters can call on at some future date. Special favors work best when the individual granting them is trustworthy. A Lawful Good or Lawful Neutral NPC will do whatever can be done to fulfill an obligation when the time comes, short of breaking laws. A Lawful Evil NPC does the same, but only because a deal is a deal. A Neutral Good or Neutral NPC might pay off favors to protect their reputation. A Chaotic Good NPC is more concerned about doing right by the adventurers, honoring any obligations without wor- rying too much about personal risk or adherence to the law. # Special Rights A politically powerful person can reward characters by giving them special rights, which might be artic- ulated in some sort of official document or procla- mation. For example, characters might be granted special rights to attack pirate ships or other enemies of the crown, to lead rites or ceremonies in a com- munity, or to negotiate on a ruler's behalf. They might receive a lifetime of free room and board from the grateful citizens of a community or gain the sworn service of local soldiers to assist them as needed. Special rights last only as long as the legal docu- ment dictates, and such rights can be revoked if the adventurers abuse them. TITLES A politically powerful figure has the ability to dis- pense titles. A title often comes with a parcel of land (see above). For example, a character might be awarded the title Earl of Stormriver or Countess of Dun Fjord, along with a parcel of land that includes a settlement or region of the same name. Archfey are fond of granting whimsical (and alliterative) titles, such as Chancellor of Chocolates or Grand Duke of Giggles, which might come with minor supernatural gifts (see "Supernatural Gifts" in this chapter) rather than land. A character can hold more than one title, and ina feudal society, those titles can be passed down to (or distributed among) one's children. A character who holds a title is expected to act in a manner befitting that title. By decree, titles can be stripped away if the character fails to meet the obligations and re- sponsibilities that come with the title. TRAINING A character might be offered special training. This kind of training isn't widely available and thus is highly desirable. The character must spend 30 days with the trainer to receive a special benefit. Possible training benefits include the following: - The character gains proficiency in a skill. - The character gains proficiency with a tool. - The character learns a language. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 81 ewe ee a nie Spe 82 Moss This section can help you speed up play when re- solving outcomes with large groups of monsters, also known as mobs. Tips Follow these tips to smooth a combat encounter with a large number of monsters: Damage. Use the average damage specified in a monster's stat block. Hit Points. If a spell or attack reduces a monster to a handful of Hit Points, assume the monster is killed or otherwise taken out of the fight. Monster Mobs. Divide a large number of identical monsters into smaller mobs and spread their turns out between the characters' turns. Mobs of five to eight identical creatures work well, but don't have more mobs than there are characters. # Average Results Whenever you would otherwise make a number of D20 Tests for identical monsters, the Mob Results table can help you determine the number of suc- cessful D20 Tests the monsters get without having to roll dice. Follow these steps: Step 1. Determine the minimum d20 roll the mon- sters need to succeed on the D20 Test using the following formula: Roll needed = target number - monster's bonus Step 2. Find the roll needed on the Mob Results table. If all the monsters have Advantage on the roll (for example, if they're attacking and have the Pack Tactics trait, or if they're making a saving throw against a spell and have the Magic Resistance trait), find the roll needed in the With Advantage column. If all the monsters have Disadvantage (for example, if they're attacking a creature protected by the Blur spell), use the With Disadvantage column. Otherwise, use the Normal column. Step 3. Read across the table to find a fractional number of successes you can easily apply to the group of monsters. That's the fraction of monsters that succeed on the D20 Test. # Adjudicating Areas Of Effect When the characters are fighting a large number of monsters, it's not always practical to use miniatures on a battle grid or some other visual aid. So how do you determine how many monsters are affected by the Wizard's Fireball spell or some other area of effect? The Targets in Area of Effect table offers a guide- line. To use the table, find the column for the shape # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX porno: eee; of the area, then read down until you find its size. Then check the rightmost column to see about how many creatures are caught in the area. If you imagine that the targets are spread out, decrease the number by 1d3. If they're bunched up, you can increase the number by 1d3. Of course, an area can't encompass more creatures than are present in an encounter. Your judgment always outweighs these guidelines, and it's fine to err on the side of affecting more crea- tures. For example, if eight zombies are crowded around a Fighter when the Bard centers a Shatter spell on the Fighter's space, the spell's area should definitely engulf all eight zombies, even though according to the table, a 10-foot-radius Sphere includes only three creatures. EXAMPLES The following scenario shows examples of how you as the DM can apply the guidelines described in the rest of this section. Eight Zombies surround and attack a Fighter. The zombies' attack bonus is +3, and the Fighter's AC is 18, so the roll needed is 15 (18 - 3). Finding 15 in the Normal column and reading across to the Out of 8 column, the DM gets a result of 2/8---two of the zombies hit. Using the zombies' average damage (4 Bludgeoning damage), the Fighter takes 8 Bludgeon- ing damage. After seeing the Fighter mauled by zombies, the Bard casts Shatter, centering the spell on the Fighter. (The Bard trusts that the Fighter will succeed on the Constitution saving throw and survive the resulting damage.) The spell affects a 10-foot-radius Sphere, and the Targets in Area of Effect table suggests that such an area should encompass three zombies. However, the DM decides that all eight zombies (and the Fighter) are affected. The zom- bies' Constitution saving throw bonus is +3, and the Bard's spell saving throw DC is 16, so the roll needed is 13 (16 - 3). Finding 13 in the Normal column and reading across to the Out of 8 column, the DM gets a result of 3/8, so three of the zombies succeed on their saving throws. Seeing a larger crowd of zombies in the dis- tance, the Wizard casts Fireball. The spell covers a 20-foot-radius Sphere. The Targets in Area of Effect table suggests that area covers ten zombies, but the DM rules that they're densely packed together and adds 1d3, rolling a 2. So the spell engulfs twelve zombies in its area. The zombies' Dexterity saving throw modifier is -2, and the Wizard's spell save DC is 16, so the roll needed is 18 (16 - \[-2\]). Finding 18 in the Normal column and reading across to the Out of 6 column, the DM gets a result of 1/6. Twelve times 1/6 is 2, so two of the twelve zombies succeed on the save. Mos RESULTS Roll Needed Number of Successes With With Normal Advantage Disadvantage Out of 4 Out of 5 Out of 6 Outof8 Out of10 1 1-4 1 4/4 5/5 6/6 8/8 10/10 2 5-6 = 4/4 5/5 6/6 3/8 10/10 3 7-8 2 4/4 5/5 5/6 7/8 9/10 4 9 " 3/4 4/5 5/6 7/8 9/10 5 10 3 3/4 4/5 5/6 6/8 8/10 6 N = 3/4 4/5 5/6 6/8 8/10 7 12 4 3/4 4/5 4/6 6/8 7/10 8 13 5 3/4 3/5 4/6 5/8 7/10 9 14 --- 2/4 3/5 4/6 5/8 6/10 10 ime 6 2/4 3/5 3/6 4/8 6/10 nD} 15 7 2/4 3/5 3/6 4/8 5/10 12 16 ae 2/4 2/5 3/6 4/8 5/10 13 --- 8 2/4 2/5 2/6 3/8 4/10 14 7 9 1/4 2/5 2/6 3/8 4/10 15 18 10 1/4 2/5 2/6 2/8 3/10 16 = n 1/4 V5 2/6 2/8 3/10 7 19 12 1/4 Ws 1/6 2/8 2/10 18 = 13 1/4 Y/5 6 1/8 2/10 19 20 14-15 0 ys 1/6 1g 10 20 \_ 16-17 0 0 0 0 110 # Targets In Area Of Effect Area Shape and Size Number of Cone Cube Circular\* Line Targets 10-foot 5-to 10-foot 5-foot-radius 1 15-to 20-foot ---15-foot --- 30-foot-long, 5-foot-wide 2 25-foot \_ 10-foot-radius 30-foot-long, 10-foot-wide or 60-foot-long, 3 5-foot-wide \_ 20-foot --- 90- or 100-foot-long, 5-foot-wide 4 30-foot oe --- 60-foot-long, 10-foot-wide or 120-foot-long, 5 5-foot-wide 35-foot 25-foot 15-foot-radius = --- 6 40-foot 30-foot 90- or 100-foot-long, 10-foot-wide 8 45-foot --- a --- 9 50-foot 35-foot 20-foot-radius 120-foot-long, 10-foot-wide 10 55-foot 40-foot --- --- 12 60-foot 45-foot 25-foot-radius = --- 16 \_ 50-foot 30-foot-radius =20 \*Use this column for Cylinders, Emanations (using the size of the Emanation rather than its radius), and Spheres. # CHAPTER\|DM'STOOLBOX 83 amy at " # Nonplayer Characters Come In # All Shapes Ando Sites. # Nonplayer Characters Nonplayer characters (NPCs) are supporting char- acters controlled by you, the DM. Examples include the local innkeeper, the sage who lives in the tower on the outskirts of town, and the death knight out to destroy the kingdom. The Monster Manual contains stat blocks you can use to represent NPCs in your game. You can add details to make them distinctive and memorable. For example, your players will have no trouble re- membering the no-nonsense blacksmith with the tattoo of the black rose on her right shoulder or the badly dressed musician with the broken nose, NPCs in your game rarely need much more complexity than that. DETAILED NPCs Flesh out NPCs who play prominent roles in your adventures. You can use the accompanying NPC Tracker to record information as you determine these six elements of your NPC: Name Alignment Appearance Stat Block Personality Secret # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX tin, Se NAME You'll need a name for any NPC who plays a prom- inent role in your campaign. You can pick a given name and a surname from any of the accompanying tables; a name can include options from different ta- bles. If you like, you can roll 1d6 to determine which table to choose a name from, then roll 1d12 to get a name. You can also alter or combine names, pull from a book of names, or use a name inspired by a movie or book. StTaT Block Choose a stat block from the Monster Manual to represent the NPC's game statistics. You don't need to do this if you don't expect the NPC to engage in combat or use any special abilities (such as casting spells). You can customize the stat block using the guidelines under "Creating a Creature" in this chap- ter to better reflect the NPC you have in mind. ALIGNMENT Choose the NPC's alignment, which can help you sketch the outlines of an NPC's behavior and per- sonality. See the Player's Handbook and "Alignment" in this chapter for more information. 1: COMMON Names 1d12\_ Common Given Name 1 Adrik Alvyn Aurora Eldeth Eldon Farris Kathra Kellen Lily 10 Nissa N Xinli 12 Zorra won DM kw PB 2: GUTTURAL NAMES 1d12 Guttural Given Name 1 Abzug Bajok Bharash Grovis Gruuna Hokrun Mardred Rhogar Skuldark 10 Thokk Ne sUrzul 12. \~Varka won Dum & Ww LH 3: LyricaL NAMES 1d12\_ Lyrical Given Name 1 Arannis 2 Damaia 3 Darsis 4 Dweomer 5 Evabeth 6 ---\_Jhessail 7 Keyleth 8 Netheria 9 Orianna 10 Sorcyl 1) Umarion 12 'Velissa Common Surname Brightsun Dundragon Frostbeard Garrick Goodbarrel Greycastle lronfist Jaerin Merryweather Redthorn Stormriver Wren Guttural Surname Burska Gruuthok Hrondl Jarzzok Kraltus Shamog Skrangval Ungart Uuthrakt Vrakir Yuldra Zulrax Lyrical Surname Arvannis Brawnanvil Daardendrian Drachedandion Endryss Meliamne Mishann Silverfrond Snowmantle Summerbreeze Thunderfoot Zashir 4: MONOSYLLABIC NAMES Monosyllabic 1d12 Given Name 1 Chen Creel Dain Dorn Flint Glim Henk Krusk Nox Nyx Rukh Shan oon DM WD --- ee) N= ©& 5: SINISTER NAMES 1d12 Sinister Given Name 1 Arachne 2 \~=Axyss 3. Carrion 4 Grinnus 5 Melkhis 6 Morthos 7 Nadir 8 Scandal 9 Skellendyre 10 'Thaltus 11 Valkora 12 Vexander 6: WHIMSICAL NAMES Whimsical Given Name Cricket Daisy Dimble Ellywick Erky Fiddlestyx Fonkin Golly Mimsy Pumpkin Quarrel Sybilwick a SLC ONDA H hewn HG Nn =\_ no Monosyllabic Surname Dench Drog Dusk Holg Horn Imsh Jask Keth Ku Kung Mott Quaal Sinister Surname Doomwhisper Dreadfield Gallows Hellstryke Killraven Nightblade Norixius Shadowfang Valtar Winterspell Xandros Zarkynzorn Whimsical Surname Borogove Goldjoy Hoddypeak Huddle Jollywind Oneshoe Scramblewise Sunnyhill Tallgrass Timbers Underbough Wimbly # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 85 86 PERSONALITY With the NPC's alignment and ability scores as a starting point, use the guidelines in the Player's Handbook to pick a few words that describe the NPC's personality. You can choose or randomly de- termine one personality trait associated with each element of the NPC's alignment, or with the NPC's highest and lowest ability scores, and combine them to inspire a persona. For example, if you find the adventurers unex- pectedly arguing with a Lawful Neutral guard, you might create a cooperative but laconic guard who is happy to help the adventurers but speaks curtly, hoping to end the conversation as quickly as possi- ble. Or, looking at the Imp stat block in the Player's Handbook and noting its highest ability (Dexterity) and its lowest (Strength), you might decide that the little devil is fidgety and indirect, constantly on the move and talking in circles to get to its point. APPEARANCE Briefly describe the NPC's most distinctive physical features. You can start with the basics---skin, hair, and eye colors, as well as the NPC's species. The NPC Appearance table can also help you identify one or two things that stand out about the charac- ter's appearance. NPC APPEARANCE 1d12 Feature 1 Distinctive jewelry 2 Flamboyant, outlandish, formal, or ragged clothes 3 \_\_ Uses an elegant mobility device (wheelchair, brace, or cane) Pronounced scar Unusual eye color (or two different colors) Tattoos or piercings Birthmark Unusual hair color Bald, or braided beard or hair 10 Distinctive nose (large, bulbous, angular, small) oon nw 1\]\_\_\_ Distinctive posture (stooped or rigid) 12 Exceptionally beautiful or ugly SECRET Describe a secret the NPC is trying to hide or pro- tect. The NPC Secrets table provides several ideas.