# Special Guest Stars The story hooks for incorporating new players can also work for occasions when you want to bring a player into the group for a single session. For ex- ample, you might have a friend visiting from out of town who wants to join your game briefly, Or per- haps you have a player you're thinking about adding to the group, but you want to make sure they'll be a good addition. Incorporating an occasional guest player is also a great way to maintain a roster of players as backup in case one of your regular play- ers has to drop out of the game. MULTIPLE DMs Many gaming groups switch DMs from time to time. The following sections describe situations that allow for multiple DMs and ways multiple DMs can add to the group's fun. # Occasional Breaks Take a break from being the DM if you need to re- charge your creative juices, plan out the next arc of your campaign, or finish up the adventure you're working on. By taking a break, you create an opportunity for another player to assume the DM role for a session or two. If not everyone can make it to a scheduled session, that can also be an opportunity for a different DM to run a short adventure. # Variety Series Some groups don't want a long campaign with sweeping plotlines; they prefer short, unconnected adventures. With that style of game, different play- ers might take turns as DM for one to three ses- sions at a time, with each adventure standing as a self-contained story. # Concurrent Campaigns You and the other DMs in your group can take turns running adventures for a few weeks or months at a time, with your campaign on hold during another DM's turn. Some groups play mul- tiple times each week, with different DMs running their campaigns on different days. # Shared World Some groups take a large, established campaign setting and divide it up geographically so different DMs can run separate campaigns in the same set- ting. In theory, characters can travel from one DM's region of the world to another's, creating continuity in the campaign even as characters might be in- volved in several plotlines. Rather than dividing a campaign geographically, you and the other DMs in your group could di- vide it thematically. Using the setting in chapter 5 of this book as an example, each DM could focus their campaign on one of the three overarching conflicts of that setting. This approach allows the same group of adventurers to sink their teeth into all three overarching conflicts while ensuring that each storyline feels distinct. Joint DMs Two or more DMs can share the creation of a single campaign, working together to maintain continu- ity from session to session and making sure that each DM's adventures advance the larger story of the world and the characters. When players who are also DMs are playing their characters, they shouldn't let their knowledge of the campaign's story influence their characters' actions. Those characters step out of the action when their players take their turns as DM. Joint DMs can also team up to run each session of a campaign, with each DM focusing on the aspects of the game they most enjoy or the DMs trading focus from session to session. One DM might run combat description and keep a battle moving while the other focuses on miniatures and music. The two DMs can play two different NPCs in a social interaction encounter, Between sessions, they can col- laborate or divide up world-building, en- counter creation, and other tasks, # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME nag cei sanlipetaanipoee\> Ie iy ee NARRATION Using a few time-honored narrative techniques, you can immerse your players in your world and bring the game to life. # Lead By Example When you roleplay and narrate with enthusiasm, you add energy to the game and draw your players into the world. Encourage the players to describe their characters' actions, then incorporate their narration into your accounts of the characters' successes and failures. BREVITY Keep your descriptions short and evocative. Fo- cus on the more important information to keep players' interest and to highlight important clues and details. Players need to know about significant features their characters can perceive---especially things like monsters in a room---before they decide what to do. Allow your players to ask follow-up questions, and provide additional description as needed. ATMOSPHERE Bring a place to life by adding touches of atmo- sphere, such as a lingering smell of ash, tiny beetles skittering along the dungeon floor, or blue flowers blossoming in the otherwise desolate and gloomy graveyard. Pick a couple of senses (sight, hearing, smell, touch, or taste) to highlight. Describe changes in the environment to direct your players' attention. For example, a bird alighting on a gravestone might draw the characters' atten- tion to it. # Draw Players' Attention Good narration invites the players to examine de- tails of the environment that lead to encounters or important information. Anything you describe with extra, subtle details draws the players' attention. Give them just enough to invite further exploration, but don't create the equivalent of a flashing neon sign reading "This way to adventure!" When using narration to guide your players, keep the following in mind: Distinguish Options. When presenting options to players, add details to distinguish the options. Should the characters take the left path or the right path? Perhaps the left path smells of rot and decay, while the faint sound of lapping water comes from the right. These details give players more information to make an informed decision without explicitly telling them where to go. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME Don't Limit Options. In general, let the players use the information they're given to decide what they want to do. Don't put unnecessary limitations on the characters' actions. That said, it can be helpful (especially with new players) to offer suggestions: "You can go through the door, search the chest, or look down the shaft." Just make sure to finish by saying, "or anything else you can think of!" Don't Assume Character Actions. Don't assume actions on the characters' part. For example, don't say "You step into the room and look up" unless the player has already told you that's what their character is doing. # Secrets And Discovery In the course of an adventure, the players and their characters will uncover information that was previ- ously unknown to them. Make sure the information they need to complete the adventure is obtainable. Don't hide important secrets or discoveries in places where the characters aren't likely to uncover them. Make sure they can't miss an important se- cret or discovery simply by failing an ability check, not talking to the right person, or not looking in the right place. See also "Perception" in this chapter for more ad- vice on hidden secrets in adventures. GIVING INFORMATION TO ONE Player When one character separates from the rest of the group, it's usually OK to let the rest of the players know what happens, assuming the separated char- acter will update the rest of the party when they're reunited. You might need to remind the other play- ers that their characters aren't present, so they can't offer advice or information to the lone character. Sometimes, though, you'll want to give informa- tion to just one player. It might be information you think the character won't want to share with the rest of the party, perhaps something related to ele- ments of the character's history that are still secret. In this case, you can use one of these methods to deliver that information: Aside to Player. Pull the player into another room, or have the other players leave the room. This approach is best if there's a whole scene that plays out with just one character involved. Try to keep these scenes brief so other players don't get bored or feel left out. Secret Message. If you just have a simple piece of information to convey, you can whisper to the player, pass a note to them, or send them a text or a direct message. # Resolving Outcomes You decide when a player makes a D20 Test based on what the character is trying to do. Players shouldn't just roll ability checks without context; they should tell you what their characters are try- ing to achieve, and make ability checks only if you ask them to. When a situation comes up and you're not sure how to adjudicate it using the rules, use these four questions to help you decide: Is a D20 Test Warranted? If the task is trivial or impossible, don't bother with a D20 Test. A char- acter can move across an empty room or drink from a flask without making a Dexterity check, whereas no lucky die roll will allow a character with an ordinary bow to hit the moon with an ar- row. Call for a D20 Test only if there's a chance of both success and failure and if there are meaning- ful consequences for failure. What Kind of D20 Test? If a character is actively trying to do something, use an ability check (or an attack roll if the character is trying to hit something). If the character is reactively trying to avoid or resist something, use a saving throw. Which Ability Does the Test Use? Think about which ability has the most influence on a char- acter's chance to succeed on the ability check # A Oungeon Room Offers Glenty Of # Details For Aoventurers To Explore or saving throw. Refer to the Abilities, Ability Checks, and Saving Throws table for guidance. Also consider whether a skill or tool proficiency might apply to an ability check. What's the DC? Based on how hard you think the task should be, set the DC as follows: 10 for an easy task, 15 for a moderately difficult task, or 20 for a hard task. The sections that follow offer advice on how to use each kind of D20 Test, when to apply Advantage and Disadvantage, and how to decide what the con- sequences of success or failure might be. # Ability Checks An ability check is a test to see whether a charac- ter succeeds at a task the character has decided to attempt. The Abilities, Ability Checks, and Saving Throws table summarizes what each ability is used for. (Constitution checks are rare, as tests of a char- acter's endurance are usually passive or reactive, making a saving throw more appropriate.) PROFICIENCY When the rules or a published adventure calls for an ability check, a skill or tool proficiency is often called out: for example, "a character who succeeds ona DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check can puzzle out the magic involved." Sometimes the rules allow # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 28 i # Abilities, Ability Checks, And Saving Throws Make an Ability Check To... Lift, push, pull, or break something Move nimbly, quickly, or quietly Push your body beyond normal limits Ability Score Measures... Strength Physical might Dexterity Agility, reflexes, balance Constitution Health and stamina Intelligence Reasoning and memory Wisdom Perceptiveness and mental fortitude Charisma Confidence, poise, and charm for any one of two or more proficiencies to apply to a check. When deciding what check a character should make, be generous in determining if the character's Proficiency Bonus comes into play. You might specifically ask for an Intelligence (Arcana) check, or you can ask for an Intelligence check and let the player negotiate with you to see if one of the character's skill or tool proficiencies applies. # Trying Again Sometimes a character fails an ability check and the player wants to try again. In many cases, fail- ing an ability check makes it impossible to attempt the same thing again. For some tasks, however, the only consequence of failure is the time it takes to attempt the task again. For example, failing a Dexterity check to pick a lock on a treasure chest doesn't mean the character can't try again, but each attempt might take a minute. If failure has no consequences and a character can try and try again, you can skip the ability check and just tell the player how long the task takes. Alter- natively, you can call for a single ability check and use the result to determine how long it takes for the character to complete the task. Group CHECKS Group checks are a tool you can use when the party is trying to accomplish something together and the most skilled characters can cover for characters who are less adept at the task. To make a group abil- ity check, everyone in the group makes the ability check. If at least half the group succeeds, the whole group succeeds, Otherwise, the group fails. Group checks aren't appropriate when one char- acter's failure would spell disaster for the whole party, such as if the characters are creeping across a castle courtyard while trying not to alert the guards. In that case, one noisy character will draw the guards' attention, and there's not much that stealthier characters can do about it, so relying on individual checks makes more sense. Similarly, don't use a group check when a single successful check is sufficient, as is the case when finding a hidden com- partment with a Wisdom (Perception) check. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME --- \< aeap eneree ees Reason or remember Notice things in the environment or in creatures' behavior Influence, entertain, or deceive Make a Saving Throw To... Physically resist direct force Dodge out of harm's way Endure a toxic hazard Recognize an illusion as fake Resist a mental assault Assert your identity Consider using group checks in situations such as the following: Research Tasks. The characters are trying to learn about an ancient prophecy from an archive. The characters can make a group Intelligence (Investi- gation) check to find sources in the archive; char- acters who are knowledgeable about such topics and about research methods in general can tell the other characters the most likely places to direct their search. If the group check is successful, the characters find enough different sources to paint a clear picture of the prophecy; otherwise, their information is incomplete. Roped Together. The characters are tied together as they scale a cliff or cross a rickety rope bridge. If one or two characters fail their checks, the suc- cessful characters can stop their fall and prevent disaster, but if more than half the party fails, the whole group falls. You could also apply this idea to something like a long swim, where strong swim- mers can help weaker ones. Social Situations. One character offends someone at a diplomatic event, and a noble demands the adventurers be escorted from the premises. The characters can make a group Charisma (Persua- sion) check to avoid getting thrown out; they just need a few convincing arguments and the ability to smooth over any gaffes. You could apply this same principle to other Charisma checks using Deception, Intimidation, or Performance. PASSIVE CHECKS Ability checks normally represent a character's active effort to accomplish something, but occa- sionally you need a passive measure of how good a character is at doing a thing. Passive Perception is the most common example. (See "Perception" later in this chapter.) You can extend the concept of a passive ability check to other abilities and skills. For example, if your game features a lot of social interaction, you can record each character's Passive Insight score, calculated in much the same way as Passive Perception: 10 plus all modifiers that nor- mally apply to a Wisdom (Insight) check. # Attack Rolls In combat, an attack roll is used to determine whether an attack hits. You can also use attack rolls to resolve noncombat activities that are similar to attacks in combat, such as an archery contest or a game of darts. Assign an Armor Class to the target, decide whether the character is proficient with the weapon used, then have the player make an attack roll. (See also "Degrees of Success" in this chapter.) # Saving Throws In contrast to an ability check, a saving throw is an instant response to an effect and is almost never made by choice. A saving throw makes the most sense when something bad threatens a character and the character has a chance to avoid or resist it. Most of the time, a saving throw comes into play when an effect---such as a spell, monster ability, or trap---calls for it, telling you what kind of saving throw is involved and providing a DC for it. In other situations that call for a saving throw, it's up to you to decide which ability score is involved. The Abilities, Ability Checks, and Saving Throws table offers suggestions. # Difficulty Class You establish the Difficulty Class for an ability check or a saving throw when a rule or an adven- ture doesn't give you one. Choose a DC from the Typical DCs table based on the task's difficulty. Typicat DCs Task pc Task DC Very easy 5 Hard 20 Easy 10 Very hard 25 Moderate 15 Nearly impossible 30 The task difficulties are explained below: Very Easy. Most people can accomplish a DC 5 task with little chance of failure. Unless circumstances are unusual, let characters succeed at such a task without making a check. Easy, Moderate, and Hard. These are the most common difficulties, and you can run your game using only them. A character with a 10 in the associated ability and no proficiency will succeed at an easy task around 50 percent of the time. For a moderate task, a character needs either a higher score or proficiency to have a similar chance of success, whereas a hard task typically requires both to have a similar chance. If you can't decide between two levels of difficulty, choose a DC somewhere in the middle, such as 17 or 18 fora task that is a little easier than "hard." Very Hard and Nearly Impossible. A DC 25 task is almost out of reach for low-level characters, but more reasonable after level 10 or so. Low-level characters have no chance to accomplish a DC 30 task, while a level 20 character with proficiency and a relevant ability score of 20 still needs a 19 or 20 on the die roll to succeed at a task of this difficulty. If you're setting the DC for a saving throw, don't go lower than 10 or higher than 20. If a creature is the source of the effect forcing a saving throw, use the standard formula for calculating a save DC (see "Calculated DCs" below). CALCULATED DCs For some ability checks and most saving throws, the rules default to the following formula: DC =8 + ability modifier + Proficiency Bonus This formula often sets the saving throw DC when a creature is casting a spell or using a special abil- ity, but it can also apply to ability checks that are contests between two creatures. For example, if one creature is holding a door shut, use its Strength modifier and Proficiency Bonus to set the DC for opening the door. When another creature tries to force the door open, the creature makes a Strength (Athletics) check against that DC. Another way to handle similar situations is to have one creature's ability check set the DC for another creature's check. That's how hiding works, for example: a hiding creature's total Dexterity (Stealth) check sets the DC for Wisdom (Percep- tion) checks made to find the hidden creature. # Advantage And Disadvantage Advantage and Disadvantage are among the most useful tools in your toolbox. They reflect temporary circumstances that might affect the chances of a character succeeding at a task. Advantage is also a great way to reward a player who shows exceptional creativity in play. Characters often gain Advantage or Disadvantage through the use of special abilities, actions, spells, or other features of their classes or species. In other cases, you decide whether a circumstance would merit Advantage or Disadvantage. As described in the Player's Handbook, if different circumstances would give both Advantage and Disadvantage in the same situation, the Advantage and Disadvantage cancel out, regardless of how many circumstances would grant Advantage or Disadvantage. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 29 30 ADVANTAGE Consider granting Advantage when... - Circumstances not related to a creature's own capabilities provide it with an edge. - Some aspect of the environment improves the character's chance of success. - A player shows exceptional creativity or cunning in attempting or describing a task. - Previous actions (whether taken by the character making the attempt or some other creature) im- prove the chances of success. DISADVANTAGE Consider imposing Disadvantage when... - Circumstances hinder success in some way. - Some aspect of the environment makes success less likely. - An element of the plan or description of an action makes success less likely. CONSEQUENCES As a DM, you can use a variety of approaches when adjudicating success and failure to tailor the game to your liking. Success AT A Cost When a character fails a D20 Test by only 1 or 2, you can offer to let the character succeed at the cost of a complication or hindrance. Such complications can run along any of the following lines: - Acharacter gets her sword past an enemy's de- fenses and turns a near miss into a hit, but she then drops the sword. - Acharacter narrowly escapes the full brunt of a Fireball spell but has the Prone condition. - Acharacter fails to intimidate a kobold prisoner, but the kobold reveals its secrets anyway while shrieking at the top of its lungs, alerting other nearby monsters. By putting the choice of success at a cost in the players' hands, and even letting them choose the setbacks, you can give players more agency in craft- ing the story of their characters' deeds. # Degrees Of Failure Sometimes a failed D20 Test has different conse- quences depending on the degree of failure. For example, a character who fails to disarm a trapped chest might accidentally spring the trap if the check fails by 5 or more, whereas a lesser failure means the trap wasn't triggered during the botched disarm attempt. Consider adding similar distinctions to other checks. Perhaps a failed Charisma (Persua- sion) check means a queen won't help, whereas a failure of 5 or more means she throws the character in the dungeon for such a display of impudence. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME # Degrees Of Success A successful D20 Test can have degrees of success. For example, when characters participate in an ar- chery contest, you might decide that the more an attack roll exceeds the target's AC, the higher the character's score. The archery target might have AC Il, but it has five concentric rings indicating de- grees of success. So you could decide that an attack roll of 11 or 12 lands in the outermost ring, a 13 or 14 hits the next ring closer to the center, a 15 or 16 hits the third ring, a 17 or 18 hits the fourth, and a 19 or higher strikes the bull's-eye. CRITICAL SUCCESS OR FAILURE Rolling a 20 or al on an ability check or a saving throw doesn't normally have any special effect. However, you can take such an exceptional roll into account when adjudicating the outcome. It's up to you to determine how this manifests in the game. One approach is to increase the impact of the suc- cess or failure. For example, rolling a 1 on a failed attempt to pick a lock might jam the lock, and roll- ing a 20 on a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check might reveal an extra clue. For attack rolls, the rules cover what happens on anatural 20 (it's a Critical Hit) or a natural 1 (it always misses). Resist the temptation to add addi- tional negative consequences to a natural 1 on an attack roll: the automatic failure is bad enough. And characters typically make so many attack rolls that they're bound to roll dozens of natural Is over time. What might seem like an interesting consequence, like breaking the weapon used for the attack, will quickly get tiresome. # Improvising Damage The Improvising Damage table gives guidelines for determining damage on the fly. IMPROVISING DAMAGE Damage Examples 1d10 Burned by coals, hit by a falling bookcase, pricked by a poison needle 2d10 --- Struck by lightning, stumbling into a firepit 4d10 Hit by falling rubble in a collapsing tunnel, tumbling into a vat of acid 10d10 Crushed by compacting walls, hit by whirling steel blades, wading through lava 18d10 \| Submerged in lava, hit by a crashing fly- ing fortress 24d10 Tumbling into a vortex of fire on the Elemental Plane of Fire, crushed in the jaws of a godlike creature or a moon-size monster The Damage Severity and Level table is a guide to how deadly these damage amounts are for charac- ters of different levels. Cross-reference a character's level with the damage being dealt to gauge the se- verity of the damage. # Damage Severity And Level Character Levels Nuisance Deadly 1-4 5 (1d10) 11 (2410) 5-10 11 (2410) 22 (4d10) 11-16 22 (4d10) '55 (10d10) 17-20 55 (10d10) 99 (18d10) Nuisance damage rarely poses a risk of death to characters of the levels shown, but a severely weak- ened character might be laid low by this damage. Deadly damage poses a significant threat to char- acters of the levels shown and could potentially kill such a character that's missing many Hit Points. # Improvising Answers With a little preparation and a lot of flexibility, you can handle any curveball your players throw at you. One of the cornerstones of improvisational theater is called "Yes, and..." It's based on the idea that an actor takes whatever the other actors give and builds on that. A similar principle applies as you run sessions for your players. As often as possible, weave what the players give you into your story. # When A Flying Fortress Crashes To The # Ground, Unfortunate Aoventurers In Its PATH MIGHT TAKE 18010 DAMAGE OR MORE! An equally important principle is "No, but..." Sometimes characters can't do what their players want, but you can keep the game moving forward by offering an alternative. For example, imagine the characters are search- ing for a lich's lair. A player asks you if there's a mages' guild operating in a nearby city, hoping to find records that mention the lich. This wasn't a possibility you anticipated, and you don't have any- thing prepared for it. One option is to say yes and use the tools at your disposal to create a suitable mages' guild. By doing this, you reward the player for thinking creatively. Also, the guild can become a great source for adventure hooks. Another option is to say no, but a solitary mage in town might possess the desired information. This approach rewards the creative player while de- manding less work from you. # Aids To Improvisation When you need to make up something on the spot---say, a mages' guild in a town where you hadn't previously planned for one---you have abundant resources to draw on: - Lists of NPC names (see "Nonplayer Characters" in chapter 3) - Random tables (such as the ones in the "Settle- ments" section of chapter 3) - Campaign journal (described in chapter 5) - Maps (see appendix B) # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME a 32 # Running Social Interaction During a social interaction, the adventurers usually have a goal. They want to extract information, se- cure aid, win someone's trust, escape punishment, avoid combat, negotiate a treaty, or achieve some other objective. Successfully completing the en- counter means achieving that goal. Some DMs run social interaction as a free-form roleplaying opportunity, where dice rarely come into play. Other DMs resolve interactions by having characters make Charisma checks. Most games fall somewhere in between, balancing roleplaying with the occasional ability check. ROLEPLAYING You don't need to be a practiced thespian or come- dian to create drama or humor through roleplaying. The key is to pay attention to the story elements and characterizations that make your players laugh or feel emotionally engaged and to incorporate those things into your roleplaying. NPC PortrayYALs When thinking about how to roleplay an NPC ora monster, consider one or two adjectives that best describe the creature. Knowing the creature's align- ment can also help with your portrayal. The classic advice for writers holds true: show, don't tell. For example, rather than describe an NPC as jocular and honest, have the NPC make frequent puns and freely share personal anecdotes. You can further enhance your portrayal of a creature in the following ways. Use Facial Expressions, Your facial expressions help convey a creature's emotions. Smile, scowl, snarl, yawn, or pout, as appropriate. Use Motions and Posture. Movement and posture can help define an NPC's personality. You might reflect an archmage's displeasure by rolling your eyes and massaging your temples with your fingers. Hanging your head and looking up at the players conveys a sense of submissiveness or fear. Holding your head and chin high conveys confidence. Use Voices. Changing the volume of your voice and borrowing speech patterns from real life, mov- ies, or television can make NPCs distinctive. ENGAGING THE PlayerS Although some players enjoy roleplaying more than others, social interactions help immerse all players in the game. Consider the following approaches to make an interaction-heavy game session appeal to players of any tastes. Appeal to Player Preferences. Players who like act- ing (see "Know Your Players" in this chapter) thrive # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME ee } in social interactions, so let those players take the spotlight and inspire the other players by their ex- ample. However, be sure to tailor aspects of social interactions to fit the other players' tastes too. Involve Specific Characters. If you have players who don't readily get involved in social interactions, you can create situations tailored for their charac- ters. Perhaps the NPC in question is a family mem- ber or a contact of a particular adventurer and fo- cuses attention on that character. Some NPCs might pay particular attention to characters with whom they feel kinship. If a couple of players are doing most of the talking in a social interaction, take a moment now and then to involve someone else. You might have an NPC address another character directly: "And what about your hulking friend? What will you pledge in exchange for my favor?" If a player is less comfort- able with roleplaying, you can get them involved by asking them to describe their character's actions during the conversation. Use Other Ability Scores. Consider the following additional possibilities to give characters whose Charisma is not their strong suit a chance to shine: Strength. An NPC won't talk to the characters until one of them agrees to an arm-wrestling match. Or a strong character needs to bodily prevent the NPC from running away. Dexterity. An NPC is Hostile toward intruders, so the characters must talk from hiding. Or the so- cial interaction provides a distraction that allows a character to get close enough to the NPC to steal something from the NPC's pockets. Intelligence. An NPC's speech is so full of obscure references to a particular area of knowledge that the characters can't use the information they re- ceive until they interpret those obscure facts. Or the NPC refuses to give a direct answer, speaking only in vague hints that the characters must piece together to get the information they seek. Wisdom. An NPC is hiding something important, and the characters must read the NPC's nonverbal cues to understand what's true and what's decep- tion. Or key information is concealed in details around the room where the interaction takes place, which a perceptive character might notice. ATTITUDE Each creature controlled by the DM has one of the following attitudes toward the adventurers: Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile. The "Monster Be- havior" section in chapter 4 offers guidance to help you determine a creature's initial attitude, Characters can shift a creature's attitude by their words or actions. For example, buying drinks for an Indifferent group of miners might shift their attitude to Friendly. When a shift occurs, describe it to your players. For example, the miners might dis- play their newfound friendliness by imparting some useful information, offering to repay the kind ges- ture at a future date, or challenging the characters to a friendly drinking contest. ABILITY CHECKS IN SOCIAL INTERACTION You decide the extent to which ability checks shape the outcome of a social interaction. A simple social interaction might involve a brief conversation and a single Charisma check, while a more complex encounter might involve multiple ability checks helping to steer the course of the conversation. # Using The Help Action When a character uses the Help action to help another character influence an NPC or a monster, encourage the player of the helpful character to contribute to the conversation or, at the very least, describe what their character is doing or saying to contribute to the other character's success. # Running Exploration Traversing a wilderness, searching a dungeon, cir- cumventing an obstacle, finding a hidden object, in- vestigating a strange occurrence, deciphering clues, solving puzzles, and bypassing or disabling traps are all part of exploration. Not everything in your world needs to be ex- plored painstakingly. For instance, you might gloss over an unimportant journey by telling the players that they spend three uneventful days on the road before reaching the next point of interest. UsING A MAP A map can help you or your players visualize a lo- cation or region that the characters are exploring. D&D maps come in three varieties, with examples of all three found in appendix B and on the poster map: Dungeon Maps, D&D uses the word "dungeon" loosely to describe any adventure location that has interior spaces to explore (such as a castle, tower, mansion, or subterranean complex). A dungeon map shows passages, chambers, doors, and other important features of a location. Settlement Maps. A map of a settlement often shows terrain (cliffs, trees, streams, and so forth) in addition to buildings, bridges, and other im- portant features. Wilderness Maps. A wilderness map shows roads, rivers, terrain, and other features that might guide the characters on their travels or lead them astray. The area shown on a wilderness map might be as big as a continent or as small as a glade. # Exploration Oraws Adventurers Into All # Sorts Of Unusual Environments Often a map is intended for the DM's eyes only. You can copy portions of a DM's map to share with your players as a visual aid while omitting details that should remain hidden from them. Virtual tabletops often use "fog of war" and similar effects to obscure areas and features on the map that you want to keep hidden from the players. Maps designed for use with miniatures (see "Min- iatures" in this chapter) tend to be player facing, revealing nothing that would spoil the adventure. # Tracking Time Most combat encounters take less than 1 minute (10 rounds), but it's fair to round up to a whole minute in most cases, assuming characters take a few sec- onds to pull themselves together after a fight. Use similar principles to track the passage of hours, such as when characters disguise them- selves with a Seeming spell for 8 hours to infiltrate a stronghold. In this case, it takes a lot of small tasks---or something like a Short Rest---to occupy a full hour. # Actions In Exploration If tracking the passage of time is important during exploration, use a time scale appropriate for the sit- uation at hand: Rounds. In combat and other fast-paced situations, the game relies on 6-second rounds. Minutes. In a dungeon or settlement, movement happens on a scale of minutes. In the Free City of Greyhawk, getting from the Silver Dragon Inn to the wharf takes about 10 minutes, whereas it takes about 1 minute to creep down a 200-foot- long hallway, another minute to check for traps on the door at the end of the hall, and 10 minutes to search the chamber beyond for anything inter- esting or valuable. Hours. A scale of hours is often appropriate for short wilderness treks. Adventurers eager to reach the lonely tower 20 miles away, at the heart of the forest, can hurry there in 5 hours' time. Days. For long journeys, 2 scale of days works best. Following the road from Veluna City to the Free City of Greyhawk, the adventurers cover 96 miles in 4 uneventful days before a bandit ambush in- terrupts their journey. The exploration rules in the Player's Handbook give guidelines for determining travel time based on the characters' pace. In most cases, it's fine to estimate that time rather than calculating it down to the minute. Exceptions include situations like these: Spell Timer. The characters might need to go some- where or accomplish something before the dura- tion of a spell or similar effect runs out. For exam- ple, they might use the Locate Object spell to point them in the direction of an item they seek, so you need to know how far they get in the 10 minutes the spell lasts. Triggered Event. An event might occur at a specific time. For example, a door might remain open for 1 minute after the password to open it is spoken, or reinforcements might arrive 2d4 minutes after an alarm is sounded. If the characters spend time working out a puzzle or talking to an NPC, you can estimate the time spent by keeping track of how much real time passes. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME Most of what characters do during exploration, aside from movement, relates to just a few actions: Search, Study, and Utilize. Characters also often use the Help action to assist each other in these actions. Other actions come up only rarely. It's seldom necessary to rely on the action rules during exploration, except to remember that a char- acter can do only one thing at a time. A character who's busy taking the Search action to look for a se- cret door can't simultaneously take the Help action to assist another character who's taking the Study action to find important information in a book. # Taking Turns Often, characters spread out across a room to inves- tigate the elements of the room. (The exploration example in chapter \| of the Player's Handbook shows this dynamic in action.) In such situations, have the characters take turns, though it's usually not necessary to roll Initiative as you would in a combat encounter. Resolve one character's actions before moving to the next. There's no hard-and-fast rule about how long to spend on each character's activity, but make sure no one is waiting for their turn for too long. You can build tension in an exploration encounter by shifting focus right before a character makes an ability check or opens a chest, leaving everyone ea- ger to hear what happens next. ABILITY CHECKS IN EXPLORATION When a character tries to do something during ex- ploration, you decide whether that action requires an ability check to determine success (as described in the earlier "Resolving Outcomes" section). Certain situations might call for a balance between ability checks and roleplaying. For example, puzzles are an opportunity for players to do some problem-solving, but players can also lean on their characters' talents and attributes to provide direc- tion. A character who succeeds on an Intelligence (Investigation) check might notice a clue that gives the players a hint to the puzzle's solution. # \_, a 1 as, s he 4, - a In A COURTYARD FULL OF MONSTERS, WILL CHARACTERS -. ge. EVEN NOTICE THAT THE TREE HAS GveEs? ' PERCEPTION As the DM, you're the interface between your play- ers and the world of the game. You tell them what their characters perceive, so it's important to make sure you're telling them important information about their surroundings. The Perception skill and Wisdom checks made using it are key tools for you. This section offers guidance to help you use the Perception rules in the Player's Handbook. WHEN TO CALL FoR A CHECK An important time to call for a Wisdom (Percep- tion) check is when another creature is taking the Hide action. Noticing a hidden creature is never trivially easy or automatically impossible, so char- acters can always try Wisdom (Perception) checks to do so. Using Passive Perception. Sometimes, asking play- ers to make Wisdom (Perception) checks for their characters tips them off that there's something they should be searching for, giving them a clue you'd rather they didn't have. In those circumstances, use characters' Passive Perception scores instead. Using the Investigation Skill. The Investigation skill applies to situations where a character is us- ing reason and deduction to arrive at a conclusion about something under examination. Investigation applies when characters are trying to figure out how a thing works---how to open a trick door, how to get into a secret compartment, and so on. Don't use the Investigation skill to determine if a character notices something---that's the purview of Perception. For example, a successful Wisdom (Perception) check allows a character to find a se- cret door or something that betrays its presence, such as thin seams marking the edges of the door. If the secret door is locked, a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check would allow a character to fig- ure out the trick to opening it---by turning a nearby statue so it faces the door, for example. HIDDEN THINGS IN ADVENTURES Secret doors, hidden compartments, concealed traps, and stashed treasures are common elements in adventures. When using such elements, if some- thing is hidden, allow for the possibility that the characters might not find it. It's fine to hide extra treasures or delightful surprises, but don't hide ele- ments that are essential to the characters' success in places where characters might not find them. Even if the hidden objects aren't essential to the adventure's success, plant hints that clue players in to the idea that there might be something hidden