# Xp Budget Per Character Party's Encounter Difficulty Level Low Moderate High 1 50 75 100 2 100 150 200 3 150 225 400 4 250 # 375 500 5 500 750 1,100 6 600 1,000 1,400 7 750 1,300 1,700 8 1,000 # 1,700 2,100 9 1,300 2,000 2,600 10 1,600 2,300 3,100 N 1,900 2,900 4,100 # 12 2,200 3,700 4,700 13 2,600 4,200 5,400 14 2,900 4,900 6,200 15 3,300 # 5,400 7,800 16 3,800 6,100 9,800 7 4,500 7,200 11,700 18 5,000 8,700 # 14,200 19 5,500 10,700 17,200 20 6,400 13,200 22,000 Step 3: Spend Your Budget. Every creature has an XP value in its stat block. When you add a creature to your combat encounter, deduct its XP from your XP budget to determine how many XP you have left to spend. Spend as much of your XP budget as you can without going over. It's OK if you have a few unspent XP left over. Examples are given below: Example 1. A low-difficulty encounter for four level i characters has an XP budget of 50 « 4, for a total of 200 XP. With that, you could build any of the following encounters: - | Bugbear Warrior (200 XP) - 2 Giant Wasps (100 XP each), for 200 XP total - 6 Twig Blights (25 XP each), for 150 XP total Example 2. A moderate-difficulty encounter for five level 3 characters has an XP budget of 225 « 5, for a total of 1,125 XP. With that, you could build either of these encounters: \~ 2 Nothics (450 XP each) and 9 Stirges (25 XP each), for 1,125 XP total \~ \] Wight (700 XP), 1 Warhorse Skeleton (100 XP), and 6 Skeletons (50 XP each), for 1,100 XP total Example 3. A high-difficulty encounter for six level 15 characters has an XP budget of 7,800 « 6, for a total of 46,800 XP. With that, you could build this encounter: - 2 Adult Red Dragons (18,000 XP each) and 2 Fire Giants (5,000 XP each), for 46,000 XP total TROUBLESHOOTING When creating and running combat encounters, keep the following in mind. Many Creatures. The more creatures in an en- counter, the higher the risk that a lucky streak on their part could deal more damage to the characters than you expect. If your encounter includes more than two creatures per character, include fragile creatures that can be defeated quickly. This guide- line is especially important for characters of level 1 or 2. Adjustments. A player's absence might warrant removing creatures from an encounter to keep it at the intended difficulty. Also, die rolls and other factors can result in an encounter being easier or harder than intended. You can adjust an encounter on the fly, such as by having creatures flee (making the encounter easier) or adding reinforcements (making the encounter harder). CR O Creatures. Creatures that have a CR of 0, particularly ones that are worth O XP, should be used sparingly. If you want to include many CR 0 critters in an encounter, use swarms from the Monster Manual instead. " # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES 115 116 # Kobolos Builo A Barricade To # Keep Aoventurers At Bay. Number of Stat Blocks. The best combat encoun- ters often pair one kind of creature with another, such as fire giants paired with hell hounds. Be mind- ful of the number of stat blocks you need to run the encounter. Referencing more than two or three stat blocks for a single encounter can be daunting, par- ticularly if the creatures are complex. Powerful Creatures. If your combat encounter includes a creature whose CR is higher than the party's level, be aware that such a creature might deal enough damage with a single action to take out one or more characters. For example, an Ogre (CR 2) can kill a level 1 Wizard with a single blow. Unusual Features. If a monster has a feature that lower-level characters can't easily overcome, con- sider not adding that monster to an encounter for characters whose level is lower than the monster's Challenge Rating. # Monster Behavior The attitudes, motivations, and behavior of the monsters in an encounter help determine how a social interaction plays out (and whether it might erupt into combat) and influence the course of combat. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES # Initial Attitudes A published adventure typically notes or implies whether a creature's initial attitude toward the ad- venturers is Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile. In an encounter you've created, you can decide that start- ing attitude, or you can randomly determine it using the Initial Attitude table. # Initial Attitude 1d12\* Initial Attitude 4orlower Hostile 5-8 Indifferent 9orhigher Friendly \*Roll different dice to alter the range and likelihood of possible atti- tudes. For example, you could roll 1d6 for a predatory monster, 1d6 + 3 for ordinary travelers, or 1d6 + 6 for kindhearted individuals. # Monster Personality If an encounter involves a significant individual, use the guidance in the "Nonplayer Characters" section of chapter 3 to flesh out the details of that individ- ual's personality and aims. For a group of nameless monsters, you can decide on a personality based on the monsters' entries in the Monster Manual, or you can use the Monster Personality table to inform EE SEE how you portray the monsters and their actions. It's simplest to assign the same personality traits to an entire group of monsters in an encounter. For ex- ample, one bandit gang might be an unruly mob of braggarts, while the members of another gang are always on edge and ready to flee at the first sign of danger. MONSTER PERSONALITY 1d8 Personality 1 Cowardly; surrenders easily Greedy; wants treasure wn Boastful; makes a show of bravery but runs from danger Disorderly; poorly trained and easily rattled Fanatical; ready to die fighting Brave; stands firm against danger Jocular; taunts enemies Orderly; difficult to rattle on KT uN # Monster Relationships Encounters with groups of monsters can be more interesting if rivalries, hatreds, or attachments exist among the monsters in the group. The death of a much-revered leader might throw its followers into a frenzy. On the other hand, a monster might flee if its hunting companion is killed, or a mistreated toady might be eager to surrender and betray its boss in return for its life. You can use the Monster Relationships table to inspire such relationships within a monster group. MONSTER RELATIONSHIPS 1d6 Relationship 1 Two monsters have a bitter rivalry; each wants the other to suffer. 2 One monster, bullied by the others, hangs back and flees at the first opportunity. 3 One monster is revered or even worshiped by the others, who will die for it. 4 One monster is admired by the group; its allies try to impress or help it. 5 One monster cares only for itself and not the rest of the group. 6 One monster bullies the others; it forces them into danger, but they want it defeated. REACTIVE TACTICS A great way to make an adventure location feel alive---particularly an organized base or strong- hold---is to allow its denizens to react to the pres- ence of the adventurers. Once they are aware of trespassers, sapient creatures might either fortify their own locations or leave those locations to assist colleagues and expel the invaders. Take a copy of the adventure map, and pencil in the locations of all its inhabitants to give yourself a sense of where they're located relative to each other. When the adventurers engage in combat or any other noisy activity, assume that nearby crea- tures hear the noise and are alerted to the adven- turers' presence. (Creatures that can't hear might be alerted by vibrations or other sensory cues.) Once alerted, a creature has several options: Ambush. The creature leaves its current location and takes up a position near the adventurers' lo- cation, hoping to catch the adventurers unaware. Ambushers try to hide and, once hidden, take ad- vantage of any opportune moment to attack. Fortify. The creature attempts to fortify its loca- tion by using furniture or heavy objects to block doors or entryways. Increase the DC to force open a blocked door by 3, and hastily blocked pas- sageways are Difficult Terrain. A creature with a ranged attack that selects this option seeks cover in its location. Hide/Flee. If possible, the creature hides in its cur- rent location, hoping to avoid any adventurers that enter, If there is nowhere to hide, the crea- ture flees to a location farther from the adventur- ers or flees to any nearby location occupied by its allies. If a fleeing creature reaches allies, those al- lies are immediately alerted to the presence of the adventurers; determine how those allies react. Investigate. The creature rushes to the sound of the disturbance to investigate, possibly joining any battle that is underway. A creature that passes near an ally while moving to investigate a disturbance might ask that ally to accompany it. If you can't decide what an alerted creature should do, have it make a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. On a successful save, the creature either investigates or lays an ambush; on a failed save, it hides or fortifies its location. When dealing with a group of crea- tures, the leader makes this saving throw on behalf of the entire group. As creatures employ reactive tactics, make notes about their new locations on your adventure map. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES Ii7 ree. 118 # Prepared Defenders Sapient creatures that have reason to believe their lair is likely to be invaded might set up a defense. Reasons to set up a defense include the following: - Adventurers invaded the lair recently and retreated. - Scouts affiliated with the lair's denizens noticed the adventurers heading toward the lair. - Aspy ina nearby settlement overheard or discov- ered the adventurers' plans and alerted the lair's occupants, Prepared defenders commonly use one or more of the following tactics: Ambushes and Barricades. Some defenders might move from their original locations to locations where they can hide near critical passageways. Defenders might also use furniture and debris to block off passages, hoping to channel invaders to- ward prepared strongpoints. Sentries and Alarms. Some creatures might move from their keyed locations to locations that allow them to monitor entrances to the lair. If possible, these creatures might equip themselves with an alarm such as a horn or improvised gong (an empty kettle, perhaps). At the first sight of intrud- ers, they raise the alarm, alerting nearby allies so those comrades can employ the reactive tactics described above. Traps. The defenders might place additional traps, such as falling nets, throughout the lair (see "Traps" in chapter 3). If the denizens of an adventure location employ any of these tactics, update your map as appropriate. # Encounter Pace And Tension A good story hooks you in with an interesting in- troduction, builds tension steadily throughout the story, then reaches a climactic conclusion. It's not always easy to mimic that structure in an adventure where the players control their characters' actions, but you can use the encounters you plan to build tension toward a climax. Each encounter in an adventure is an opportunity to make the characters' situation more complex and urgent, with more significant consequences. Successive encounters raise the tension in an ad- venture naturally, as characters spend their limited resources. Variety also contributes to a sense of es- calating tension. Build variety into your encounters in three ways: Vary Encounter Type. Use a mix of social interac- tion, exploration, and combat encounters. Differ- ent types of encounters provide different amounts # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES of tension (generally, combat encounters offer the most), but they also feel very different and can have drastically different stakes. Vary Encounter Difficulty. Include encounters that offer low, moderate, and high difficulty. A mix of low- and moderate-difficulty encounters early in the adventure can lead to a climactic high-difficulty fight, perhaps against the adven- ture's primary villain or another threat. Vary Threats. Build encounters using different threats. If the characters are delving into a kuo- toa temple and therefore expect many encounters to include various kuo-toa, look for opportunities to include different monsters that might serve as guards, pets, or allies to the kuo-toa. Include a variety of hazards, environmental dangers, and traps in exploration encounters, and use NPCs with different personalities and different goals in social interaction encounters. # Urgency And Rests While successive encounters increase tension, tak- ing a Short Rest relaxes the tension somewhat, as characters have a chance to replenish some of their resources. In many adventures, though, the char- acters and their players have a sense that they need to act quickly to deal with the situation presented by the adventure. This creates tension between the need to rest and the sense that things are getting worse while the characters are resting. You can influence the pace and tension of your adventure by determining where and when the characters can rest. If the characters are exploring a vast dungeon, consider scattering a few small rooms with only one door, where the characters can bar the door and reasonably expect to spend an hour or even a night resting in safety. On the flip side, cautious characters might try to take a Short Rest be- tween every encounter, never really straining their resources. It's OK to interrupt those rests once in a while to maintain a sense of tension or to heighten the urgency, making it clear that even an hour spent resting could jeopardize their chances of success. Easing Up. `\t i`{=tex}s possible to dial up the urgency to the point that the players feel they don't have time to investigate the interesting details they encounter in the world. When this happens, consider using a helpful NPC to take some of the pressure off. A wise elder might advise them that the situation is not as urgent as they fear, a whimsical Fey being might use magical mischief to force them to slow down, or a kindly Celestial could tell them they're taking the concerns of the mortal world just a bit too seriously. # Mysterious Lights Glimmer In A # Remote Mountain Lake # Adventurers To Explor # Random Encounters Random encounters are randomly determined en- counters that don't occur in a fixed location. The options are often presented in a table. When a ran- dom encounter occurs, you roll a die and consult the table to determine what the party encounters. Sample random encounter tables appear in the adventure examples later in this chapter. Similar tables appear in many published adventures and rulebooks, and you can easily create your own by following these examples. Handled well, random encounters can serve a variety of useful purposes. Create Urgency. Wandering monsters encourage characters to keep moving and to find a safe place to rest. Sometimes you can create a sense of danger and urgency by rolling dice behind your DM screen, even without an actual encounter! Drain Character Resources. By draining the party's Hit Points and spell slots, leaving the adventurers feeling underpowered and vulnerable, random en- counters can build tension in an adventure. Establish Atmosphere. Thematic links among mon- sters appearing in random encounters create a tone and an atmosphere that define the environment the characters are exploring. For example, an encoun- ter table filled with bats, wraiths, giant spiders, and zombies creates a sense of horror and suggests the possibility of even more terrifying foes. Provide Assistance. Some random encounters can benefit the characters instead of hindering or harm- ing them. Helpful creatures might give the charac- ters useful information or assistance. Reinforce Campaign Themes. Random encounters can remind the players of the major themes and conflicts in your campaign. For example, if a war between two nations is a major conflict in your campaign, you might design random encounter ta- bles to reinforce the ever-present threat of that con- flict, including encounters with bedraggled troops returning from battle, refugees fleeing invaders, lone messengers riding for the front lines, enemy war parties, and so on. A Life of Its Own. Sometimes a random encounter that starts off incidental can become important to the story. A random encounter with a wandering ogre might end with the ogre offering to help the characters get where they need to go, or the ogre might have something in a nearby den that is sig- nificant to the adventure story---a prisoner, a stolen item, or important information. Or the players might find the ogre's personality delightful, prompt- ing you to make the ogre a more important part of the story. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES 11g 120 # Bring It To An End The climactic ending of an adventure fulfills the promise of all that came before. The best climax is one the players see coming, so if a dragon is the mastermind behind all the nefarious activity hap- pening in an adventure, having the dragon's min- ions mention the nature of their boss sets up the coming climactic encounter. Although the climax must hinge on the successes and failures of the characters up to that moment, the Adventure Climax table can provide suggestions to help you shape the end of your adventure. ADVENTURE CLIMAX 1410 Climax 1 The adventurers confront a villain and a group of minions in a battle to the finish. 2 The adventurers chase a villain while dodging obstacles designed to thwart them, leading to a final confrontation in the villain's refuge. 3. The actions of the adventurers or a villain result in a cataclysmic event that the adven- turers must escape. 4 The adventurers race to the site where a villain is bringing a master plan to its conclu- sion, arriving just as that plan is about to be completed. 5 Avillain and two or three lieutenants perform separate rites in a large room. The adventur- ers must disrupt all the rites. 6 Anally betrays the adventurers as they're about to achieve their goal. (Use this climax carefully, and don't overuse it.) 7 Aportal opens to another plane of existence. Creatures on the other side spill out, forcing the adventurers to close the portal while dealing with a villain at the same time. 8 The dungeon begins to collapse while a villain attempts to escape in the chaos. 9 The adventurers must choose whether to pur- sue a fleeing villain or save an NPC they care about or a group of innocents. 10 Just when the characters think the main threat is defeated, it transforms into a differ- ent monster or a more powerful form. DENOUEMENT In most stories, there's a period after the climax, in which loose plot threads are tied up and everything is explained. An adventure might also include this kind of denouement: time to discover what treasure # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES aa is in the dragon's hoard, an award ceremony where the queen gives medals to the victorious heroes, or even a time to mourn adventuring companions who didn't survive the battle. The denouement can also be an opportunity for the players to identify loose threads that haven't been tied up---threads that can lead them into the next adventure. The "Episodes and Serials" section in chapter 5 offers suggestions for weaving these connecting threads. # Adventure Rewards For some characters, the prospect of material reward is their primary reason for going on adven- tures. For others it's a welcome added benefit to pursuing their other goals. Chapter 7 describes different kinds of treasure, but see also "Marks of Prestige" in chapter 3 for other rewards you might use. The following sections describe how treasure is typically dispersed in an adventure. # Individual Treasure Characters might find small amounts of treasure in the pockets, pouches, or personal stashes of individ- ual monsters. Even if a monster doesn't intention- ally collect treasure, characters might find scattered coins and other monetary treasure left behind by the monster's previous victims. You can use the Random Individual Treasure table to determine how much treasure a single monster has based on its Challenge Rating (CR). The table includes the average total in parentheses, which you can use instead of rolling. To determine the total amount of treasure for a group of similar creatures, you can roll once and multiply the total by the num- ber of creatures in the group. RANDOM INDIVIDUAL TREASURE CR Treasure 0-4 3d6 (10) GP 5-10 2d8 x 10 (90) GP 11-16 2d10 x 10 (110) PP 17+ 2d8 x 100 (900) PP # Treasure Hoards Adventurers sometimes discover large caches of treasure, the accumulated wealth of a large group of creatures or the belongings of a single powerful creature that hoards valuables. The Random Trea- sure Hoard table can help you create such a cache. When determining the contents of a hoard belong- ing to one monster, use the row for that monster's Challenge Rating (CR). When the hoard belongs to a large group of monsters, use the CR of the monster that leads the group. Each row includes average results for monetary treasure, which you can use instead of rolling. To create a hoard for a monster that is particularly fond of amassing treasure (such as a dragon), you can roll twice on the table or roll once and double the total. As a rough benchmark, aim to roll on the Random Treasure Hoard table about once per game session. Use the guidelines in chapter 7 to determine which magic items are in the hoard (see "Awarding Magic Items" and "Random Magic Items"). RANDOM TREASURE HoarD CR Monetary Treasure Magic Items 0-4 2d4 x 100 (500) GP 1d4-1 5-10 8d10 x 100 (4,400) GP 1d3 11-16 8d8 x 10,000 (36,000) GP 1d4 17+ 6d10 x 10,000 (330,000) GP 1d6 QueEsT REWARDS Sometimes, characters are paid for completing a quest. To determine a suitable quest reward, roll once on the Random Treasure Hoard table, using the characters' level for the Challenge Rating (CR). # A Climactic Battle At The Temple Of Elemental # Evil Brings An Adventure To A Dramatic End # Monster Treasure Preferences The Monster Manual gives treasure preferences for monsters in that book. These preferences are cate- gorized as follows: Any. The monster has a treasure hoard, the con- tents of which you can determine by rolling on the Random Treasure Hoard table. Monetary treasure can take the form of coins, trade bars, trade goods, gems, or art objects (all described in chapter 7). Magic items can belong to any trea- sure theme or category (see "Treasure Themes" and "Magic Item Categories" in chapter 7). Individual. The monster doesn't have a treasure hoard; however, it might have monetary treasure, which you can determine by rolling on the Random Individual Treasure table. This treasure can take the form of coins, trade bars, trade goods, gems, or art objects (all described in chapter 7). Treasure Theme (Arcana, Armaments, Imple- ments, or Relics). The monster has a treasure hoard skewed toward a particular theme (see "Treasure Themes" in chapter 7). You can deter- mine the size of the hoard by rolling on the Ran- dom Treasure Hoard table. If the hoard contains magic items, use the guidelines and tables in chap- ter 7 to determine each one. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES I2! # Adventure Examples This section contains example adventures that demonstrate the principles described throughout the chapter. Each provides enough information for you to run a one-session adventure, with the help of the maps in appendix B and the monster stat blocks in the Monster Manual. Each adventure in this section includes the fol- lowing information: Title. An adventure title can help you organize your campaign notes, and if you share the title with your players, it can set the tone for what's ahead. Character Level. Each adventure specifies the level of characters it's aimed at. The difficulty of encounters in each adventure is tailored for four characters of that level. You can use adventures for characters of higher or lower level or for larger or smaller groups. However, the encounters might be easier or harder than you expect unless you adjust them. Situation. Each adventure lays out what's going on---the situation that the adventurers are called on to deal with. See "Lay Out the Premise" earlier in this chapter. Hook. Each adventure offers one way to draw char- acters in to the adventure. See "Draw In the Play- ers" earlier in this chapter. Encounters. The rest of each adventure description is a series of encounters. The text describes the location where the encounter occurs, often point- ing to the maps in appendix B, and any triggering event that might provoke the encounter. Monster names in bold point you to the stat blocks in the Monster Manual. Some encounters also specify treasure the characters might find. Use your imagination to bring the locations and encounters to life, and build on the ideas the players bring to each encounter. Alter these outlines freely to suit your tastes---and those of your players---and your ideas for your campaign. *---* # A Starting Campaign You can use the adventures in this section to get a new campaign off the ground. These adven- tures are linked to locations near the Free City of Greyhawk, as described in chapter 5. You can run the first three adventures in sequence, having the characters gain a level after each adventure. They might return to their home base in the city between adventures, or they could travel to Grey- hawk after they complete "The Winged God." Use the encounters and interactions the characters have in these early levels, and the situations that interest your players, to plan later adventures. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES THE FOULED STREAM Adventure for Level I Characters Situation. An alien fungus in a cave is polluting the stream that flows past the village of High Ery. The fungus has spawned vile creatures in and around the cave. Hook. The folk of High Ery are noticing fungal growths on the riverbanks and a layer of scum on the water. The characters might live in the village, or a contact in the Free City of Greyhawk might ask them to investigate. ENCOUNTERS The adventure consists of these encounters. The First Fork. A mile upstream from the village, a stream flows into the river from a little wood on the river's south side. Characters can tell that this stream is the source of the pollution. Journey Upstream. Borogrove, a kindly Treant, keeps watch over the wood and meets the charac- ters as they follow the polluted stream. He knows the source of the corruption is inside a cave that the stream spills out of. He gives the characters a magic acorn. If swallowed, the acorn conveys the benefits of a Potion of Healing and the Lesser Restoration spell. Twig Blights. Just outside the cave, the characters encounter six Twig Blights. Corrupted Cave. Use the Underdark Warrens map in appendix B for the corrupted cave. Ignore the secret door and the inner chambers behind it. Close off the tunnels leading off the map to the south, east, and north. The characters enter the cave in the southeast, following the stream. The cave's main features and inhabitants are as follows: Entrance. A Shrieker Fungus just inside the cave entrance alerts the inhabitants to the characters' arrival. On watch near the entrance and quick to respond to the shriekers' cry are four Bullywug Warriors who have fungal growths on them. Berserk Bear. In a side cave to the southeast is a Brown Bear that drank from the stream. It's up- set because the water made it ill. If the characters can make it eat Borogrove's acorn or otherwise rid it the Poisoned condition, the bear recovers immediately and leaves them alone. Ooze's Lair. At the north end of the stream area Psychic Gray Ooze and six Stirges. After defeat- ing these creatures, the characters can destroy the brain-like fungus in the water, which is the source of the corruption. If they do, each charac- ter earns a bonus 100 XP. Journey Home. As they leave the wood, the char- acters encounter Borogrove again. If they used his acorn, he gives them another one. If they purified the source of the stream, he gives them a Staff of Flowers in gratitude. # Miner Difficulties THE WINGED Gop Adventure for Level 2 Characters Situation. After miners dug into an Underdark tun- nel, a Hook Horror found its way into the mine and became trapped. It has eaten a few miners, and the others are too terrified of the echoing clicks in the mine to hunt down the predator. Hook. The mayor of the village of Blackstone, Kristryd Splitanvil (a Lawful Good, dwarf Tough), hires the adventurers---perhaps because of how adeptly they handled the situation in "The Fouled Stream"---to deal with the monster in the mines. She offers a precious topaz worth 500 GP to ad- venturers who kill the creature or drive it away. ENCOUNTERS The adventure consists of these encounters. Exploring the Mine. Use the Mine map in appen- dix B. In the weeks since the miners abandoned the place, pests have flourished in the tunnels. Each time the characters enter a distinct area of the mine, roll on the following table. 1d6 Encounter 1 Four Violet Fungi and one Rust Monster 2 One Giant Spider and two Swarms of Insects (spiders) One Darkmantle and three Piercers A patch of yellow mold (see "Hazards" in chapter 3) on a miner's remains 5 One Gelatinous Cube 6 Sounds of Terror (see below) Sounds of Terror. The first time this encounter occurs, the characters hear eerie clacking and scraping noises echoing in the mine shafts and no- tice gouges in the walls. The second time, they find the source of those sounds and markings---the Hook Horror. The creature is hungry, but what it really wants is to find its way back to the Underdark. It retreats from a fight that is going badly for it. Underdark Connection. The tunnel in the south- east corner of the bottom level of the mine is where the miners accidentally connected to an Underdark tunnel. The hook horror entered the mine through a hole in the wall, but the hole closed behind it in a cascade of rubble. If the characters clear away the rubble from the hole, they hear clacking and scrap- ing from the other side. The hook horror hears it too and hurries here to rejoin its kin. As long as the characters stay out of its way, it ignores them as it scrambles back through the hole, never to plague the mine again. Each character then earns a bonus 200 XP. Adventure for Level 3 Characters Situation. A few weeks ago, a Red Dragon Wyrm- ling drove a band of kobolds out of their warren to claim the place as its lair. Now some of the kobolds are causing trouble in the Cairn Hills. They're raiding merchants, hoping the dragon will allow them to return home as its loyal servants. Hook. A merchant named Nondy Barducks (a Law- ful Neutral, gnome Commoner) hires the char- acters to escort his wagon to the remote mining village of Diamond Lake, which happens to be near the dragon's new lair. Nondy was robbed by kobolds on his last trip, and he wants protection this time. He offers to pay each character 150 GP. ENCOUNTERS The adventure consists of these encounters. Kobold Bandits. Along the road, the wagon is sur- rounded by eight Kobold Warriors (Neutral) who demand that the merchant surrender his goods. In combat, the kobolds shout things like "For the Winged God!" and "Fight to reclaim our home!" If four of them fall in battle, the remaining kobolds try to flee. Any captured kobold explains the situation. Kobold Supplicants. If the characters continue on their way without pursuing the kobolds, twelve Ko- bold Warriors (including any survivors of the first encounter) and six Winged Kobolds (all Neutral) approach the wagon. These kobolds humbly ask the adventurers to help them. They promise to return the goods they stole from Nondy if the adventurers drive off the dragon. Kobold Camp. If the adventurers follow fleeing ko- bolds, they can find the kobolds' camp on a nearby outcropping. The kobolds there don't fight, though, instead begging the adventurers to help them (as in "Kobold Supplicants" above). Dragon's Lair. Use the Volcanic Caves map in ap- pendix B for the dragon's lair, but close off passages to keep the lair small. Near the entrance, the char- acters encounter a gang of four Magma Mephits and three Smoke Mephits, drawn to the lair by the magic of the dragon. In the inner cave, the troublesome Red Dragon Wyrmling rests on its little hoard: - Crate holding Nondy's stolen goods (worth 400 GP) 4,200 CP, 2,000 SP, and 180 GP - Seven gemstones worth 50 GP each Potion of Healing Rope of Climbing Two Spell Scrolls (Alarm and Comprehend Languages) If the characters defeat or drive off the dragon, each of them earns a bonus 400 XP. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES 123 HORNS OF THE BEAST Adventure for Level 5 Characters Situation. A long-forgotten ruin is rumored to hold a fiendish Artifact called the Horns of the Beast. A villain hopes to claim the Artifact and put it to terrible use. Hook. An unassuming human merchant named Melchis (secretly a Chaotic Evil Fiend Cultist devoted to Iuz) hires the characters to escort him on an expedition to find an ancient temple lost in the jungle. He offers to pay them a total of 2,000 GP in trade bars---half when they reach the tem- ple and half when they safely return to civiliza- tion---and promises to support them with what he claims to be "limited magical ability." ENCOUNTERS You can use the poster map of the world of Grey- hawk for this adventure; the temple is located near the southern edge of the map, in the Amedio Jungle. The journey unfolds in three stages (see "Travel" in chapter 2), culminating in the discovery of the ruins and the artifact. Stage 1. Melchis hires a ship to carry the party to the Amedio Jungle. Use the map to determine how long the sea voyage takes, depending on where the adventurers begin the trip and figuring that the ship covers about 1% hexes per day. Near the end of the trip, as the ship crosses Jeklea Bay, it's attacked by a group of Hostile sahuagin, including two Sahuagin Priests, six Sahuagin Warriors, and a Water Elemental. (Assume the ship's crew stays out of the way of these terrifying monsters and lets the characters and Melchis deal with this threat.) Stage 1 ends when Melchis and the characters row a launch ashore. Stage 2. Melchis leads the characters into the jungle, aiming for the shore of the lake. This stage covers about 180 miles through the dense forest. Each day of the journey, roll once on the following table to determine what the characters encounter on their journey, if anything. 1d20 Encounter 1-14 No encounter 15 An Indifferent Giant Ape protects its terri- tory; its primary concern is getting the party to leave. 16 A Hostile Tyrannosaurus Rex is on the hunt and tries to eat the characters. 17 Three Allosauruses are hunting in the jungle; they are Hostile and treat the party as prey. # CHAPTER \| CREATING ADVENTURES os ee 1d20 Encounter 18 Two Ankylosauruses tromp through the for- est nearby. They are territorial and aggressive but Indifferent, and they won't pursue a flee- ing party. 19 Aband of humans, including a Veteran Warrior and eight Infantry Warriors, watch the party. They are Indifferent; they live in the jungle and aren't used to seeing other people. 20 Four Minotaurs of Baphomet prowl the jun- gle looking for Humanoids they can capture and bring back to the temple. Stage 3. Once the characters reach the edge of the lake, Melchis leads them southwest along the shore until they find the ruin. This stage covers 90 miles through coastal terrain. The second day of the journey, heavy rain obscures vision and creates quicksand pits (see "Environmental Effects" and "Hazards" in chapter 3). The front rank of the party might fall into a quicksand pit while two Giant Crocodiles attack at the same time. The rest of the journey passes without incident. The Ruins. For the ruins, use the western half of the ground floor of the Dungeon Hideout map in ap- pendix B, and ignore the stairs leading to the lower levels. Dwelling in the ruins are six Minotaurs of Baphomet who are Hostile to all intruders. They are spread out around the ruins but come quickly when they hear combat. The Artifact. The Horns of the Beast---a jagged crown made from the horns of demons and wild an- imals---rests on a pedestal in the northwest corner of the ruins. Melchis immediately attempts to seize the Artifact and place it on his head. If he does, he is transformed into a Hezrou and tries to kill the characters. A character who dons the Artifact is cursed with Demonic Possession (see "Curses and Magical Contagions" in chapter 3). The Artifact can't be removed from the character's head until a Remove Curse spell is cast on the character. If the characters defeat Melchis and search him, they find a Bag of Holding containing twelve 5-pound gold trade bars (worth 250 GP each) and a Spell Scroll of Teleportation Circle. The scroll also contains the sigil sequence for a permanent teleportation circle. At the end of the adventure, each character earns a bonus 1,000 XP. Destroying the Artifact. The Horns of the Beast can be destroyed only by dropping it in the River Oceanus, which flows through the Upper Planes (see chapter 6). A character can learn this by cast- ing Identify on the Artifact. y a e: v Lal \[a " = > - = - > # Boreal Ball - 7 Adventure for Level 7 Characters Situation. The Baron of the Boreal Ball, a minor noble of the Feywild, holds an unending ball in his ice palace. Behind the revelry, the ball is the scene for schemes and intrigues. Hook. The adventurers receive a magical invitation to the Boreal Ball that teleports the group to the ball at the appointed time. ENCOUNTERS The adventure plays out over three dances. During each one, the characters can decide whether they dance, mingle, watch the dancers, or engage in some other activity. (The Manor map in appendix B can serve as a floor plan for the baron's palace.) Each character has the opportunity to earn renown for the party (see "Renown" in chapter 3) by making a positive impression on whomever they're interact- ing with---a potential Renown Score increase of 1 per character per dance. These guests pay particu- lar attention to the characters: - Cannifer is a Satyr Revelmaster who is used to being the center of attention at every ball he attends and is thus Hostile to the adventurers. - Daris is a Friendly, fun-loving Dryad who wants to be seen dancing with all the adventurers. Minsc, Boo, ano DEeLINA NAVIGATE THE INTRIGUES OF THE Boreat Bart ii in - Fidget is a playful Pixie who is Indifferent and pesters the adventurers with pranks throughout the evening, without causing any actual harm. - Granny Snailtongue is a Hostile Green Hag who sees the adventurers as potentially useful tools. She offers to help them at every turn in hopes of putting them in her debt. - Raxas Albrethin is an arrogant, Chaotic Neutral drow Mage who is initially Hostile and wants to see the adventurers humiliated. However, once the characters' Renown Score reaches 6, Raxas admits he misjudged them and becomes Friendly. Rude Interruption. After the second dance, the ball is interrupted by a Neutral Evil Hobgoblin Warlord named Varka, who is accompanied by a Hobgoblin Captain and five Hobgoblin Warriors. The hobgob- lins are offended by the adventurers' presence and attack them. If the characters defeat the hobgoblins, their Renown Score increases by 2. Conclusion. After three dances, the Baron of the Boreal Ball appears. If the party's Renown Score is at least 6, he bestows on each character a Charm of the Boreal Ball. This charm (see "Supernatural Gifts" in chapter 3) allows a character who has it to cast the level 3 version of the Ice Knife spell. Once used, the Charm vanishes. Each character also earns a bonus 1,700 XP.