# Baba Yaga Baba Yaga (BAH-bah YAH-gah) is an arch-hag known as the Mother of All Witches. She is also the adoptive mother of Iggwilv. Baba Yaga is famous for her chicken-legged hut, in which she travels across the planes of the multiverse. This impatient, foul-tempered hag is a font of knowledge about all things magical. BAHAMUT Bahamut (ba-HA-mutt) is one of the primordial dragons who (along with Tiamat) is said to have created the First World. For practical purposes, he is a god---ageless and immortal---who has dwelled in Mount Celestia (see chapter 6) since the destruc- tion of the First World. In the Dragonlance setting, where he is called Paladine (PAL-a-deen), he is the greatest of the gods of good. On other worlds, he is revered as a god of justice and nobility and is fa- vored by Paladins. To metallic dragons, Bahamut is more like a king than a god. Individual dragons might owe Bahamut allegiance, respect him, pay tribute to him, and strive to emulate him, but they don't worship him. BALDuR's GATE The city of Baldur's Gate (BAWL-durz GATE), in the Forgotten Realms setting, is a teeming metropolis haunted by the lingering influence of three evil gods (Bane, Bhaal, and Myrkul) who refuse to stay dead. It's a place where a sword for hire can find a rich pa- tron, join a secret guild, pursue killers for a bounty, or aid desperate citizens. The city offers opportu- nities for good-hearted champions to fight against corruption and bring murderers to justice, while less moral mercenaries find a good price for their services. Baldur's Gate hosts the most reliable and ruthless market on the Sword Coast. Information, treasures, secrets, and souls can be bought or sold for the right price. BAROVIA Barovia (buh-ROVE-ee-ah) is a Domain of Dread se- questered in the Shadowfell (see chapter 6)---a sort of spiritual prison for Strahd von Zarovich in his Castle Ravenloft. It's also the name of a village in that domain. BIGBY Bigby (BIG-bee) is a former apprentice of Morden- kainen. Though he began his career determined to use magic to dominate and control others, Bigby eventually changed his ways and has worked hard to make amends for his past villainy. Mordenkainen welcomed Bigby into the adventuring company known as the Citadel of Eight (which later became the Circle of Eight, described in chapter 5). Shy and soft-spoken, Bigby was often eclipsed by his mentor, who taught Bigby how to control his ambitions. Af ter years of adventuring, Bigby crafted a handful of spells that gained him widespread renown. Of these spells, Bigby's Hand is his undisputed magnum opus. A recent misadventure led to Bigby's untimely demise. After he was crushed to death by a frost giant's boulder, Bigby was the target of a Reincarnate spell. The spell transformed Bigby from a human into a gnome. Before setting off on his next adven- ture, Bigby was overheard saying how curious he was to experience the multiverse from a gnome's perspective. Boo Boo is a hamster. More precisely, he is a miniature giant space hamster, a species native to Wildspace (see chapter 6) that is both sapient and telepathic. Boo's adventures with Minse, as well as the ham- ster's ferocity, have given Boo legendary status, par- ticularly in the city of Baldur's Gate. # Castle Ravenloft Castle Ravenloft (RAY-ven-loft) is the heart of the domain of Barovia and the home of the vampire Strahd von Zarovich. Ravenloft is also one of the most famous dungeon adventures in the history of the D&D game, providing a horror-themed expe- rience that inspired the creation of the Ravenloft setting and the adventure Curse of Strahd. # Companions Of The Hall, The Named for the dwarf stronghold of Mithral Hall in the Forgotten Realms setting, the Companions of the Hall is a group of heroic adventurers whose exploits have spanned centuries and even crossed the bounds of death. Drizzt Do'Urden is the central figure in this party; all his companions have died and been reincarnated in new forms in recent years. These other companions are Drizzt's wife, CattieBrie; his adoptive father, Bruenor Battlehammer; and his friends Wulfgar and Regis. # Company Of Seven, The The Company of Seven was a group of adventur- ers active hundreds of years ago in the Greyhawk setting. Its members included Heward, Keoghtom, Murlynd, Nolzur, Quaal, Tasha (see Iggwilv), and Zagig (see Zagyg). Some of these adventurers achieved near-divine status, and most of them are remembered for magic items that carry their names. The group inspired the formation of the Circle of Eight (described in the "Greyhawk" section in chap- ter 5). CORELLON At the dawn of the multiverse, Corellon (core-ELL-on or CORE-eh-lawn) danced from world to world and plane to plane. A being of consummate mutability and infinite grace, Corellon is a whimsical shape- shifter, able to take the form of a chuckling stream, a teasing breeze, an incandescent beam, a school of fish, or a flock of birds. Corellon's flamboyant, mercurial personality infuses every form the god adopts. Corellon loves wholeheartedly and takes pleasure from every encounter with other divine beings of the multiverse. According to legend, the first elves emerged from Corellon's shed blood, and they shared the god's changeable and audacious nature. Many elves, along with members of other species, worship Corellon. DELINA Delina (dell-EEN-ah) is a young elf Sorcerer who wields the unpredictable power of wild magic. Find- ing herself in trouble in the city of Baldur's Gate, she accidentally reawakened the ancient hero of the city, Minsc, and got thrown into further adventures pursuing her lost twin brother. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY # 355 Diancastra Diancastra (DIE-ann-CAST-rah) is a demigod and a daughter of the divine ancestor of giants, Annam. She is a trickster, an adventurer, and a scholar of magic who enjoys wandering the Material Plane in search of new curiosities and spells to learn. She longs to see the descendants of Annam---storm, cloud, fire, frost, stone, and hill giants---restored to the position of honor and respect they held in an- cient times. DrizzT Do'URDEN Drizzt Do'Urden (DRIZT doh-UR-den) is a drow exile from the city of Menzoberranzan and a fugitive from the wrath of Lolth (see chapter 6) and her priests. He wandered the surface world and gath- ered a circle of friends who became known as the Companions of the Hall. ELDER EVILs The Elder Evils are a variety of entities whose exis- tence dates to the beginnings of the multiverse---or possibly predates it. Some Elder Evils are creatures of the Far Realm (see chapter 6), while others are akin to gods or primordial beings of the Elemental Planes. Some are thought to be imprisoned, while others are said to be slumbering until they awaken in some apocalyptic cataclysm. The names given to these terrible entities include such strange descriptions as Atropus, the World Born Dead; Dendar, the Night Serpent; Hadar, the Dark Hunger; Haemnathuun, the Blood Lord; Ityak-Ortheel, the Elf-Eater; Kezef, the Chaos Hound; Kyuss, the Worm That Walks; the Queen of Chaos; Tharizdun, the Chained God; Tyranthraxus, the Flamed One; and Zargon, the Returner. They are all forces of corruption and evil. Nothing good can come from their influence. Bargains made with them end in catastrophe or death. ELMINSTER Elminster (el-MIN-ster) is a powerful and ancient archmage in the Forgotten Realms setting. As one of Mystra's Chosen, divinely called and empowered by the deity of magic, Elminster fosters magic and protects the fabric of magic in the world. Though this responsibility demands a certain amount of neutrality and dispassionate judgment, Elminster has a fundamentally kind and compassionate heart. EURYALE One card in the Deck of Many Things (see chapter 7) bears a person's proper name, and the card's name- sake, Euryale (YUR-ee-ale or yur-EYE-a-lee), is the subject of much speculation. Often assumed to be a fearsome demigod (perhaps the first medusa) or the wielder of a destructive curse, Euryale is actually a key part of the story of the magical deck's creation. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY After befriending a princess named Asteria and spending many years in her dear friend's company, Euryale was captured and sentenced to death by As- teria's father. Asteria pleaded with the gods to save her friend, and Istus (a god from the Greyhawk set- ting; see chapter 5) intervened to help the pair re- write their story, creating the Deck of Many Things. The magic of the deck helped the two escape, and they adventured together across the multiverse. Eventually, Euryale---having become an ancient, wise, and powerful Druid---settled in the Outlands (see chapter 6), where she still sometimes acts as a patron, mentor, or ally for adventurers. # Fallbacks, The Tessalynde is a young elf Rogue who dreams of leading the foremost adventuring party of the For- gotten Realms setting. While the crew she's gath- ered isn't the stuff of legend yet, she's confident her guidance can get them there. Called the Fallbacks, the team includes Anson, a human Fighter too stub- born to stay down; Cazrin, a self-taught, human Wizard determined to test her theoretical mettle against the real world; Baldric, a dwarf Cleric who refuses to tie himself to a single deity when he can trade favors with them all; Lark, a tiefling Bard with as many secrets as songs; and Uggie, a pet otyugh. First WORLD, THE Scholars speak of a primordial state, a single real- ity they call the First World, which preceded the Material Plane. Many of the peoples and monsters that inhabit the worlds on the Material Plane origi- nated there. After the First World was shattered by a great cataclysm---giving birth to the worlds that came in its wake---the progeny of the first elves, dwarves, beholders, and other iconic creatures took root on world after world, like seeds scattered by a cosmic wind. If the musings of these great sages are true, every world of the Material Plane is a reflection---or, in some cases, a distortion---of the First World. FIZBAN In the Dragonlance setting, Bahamut---who is known there as Paladine---dwelled among mortals in human guise for a time, aiding the forces of good against Takhisis (see Tiamat). He appeared as a bumbling old mage named Fizban (FIZZ-ban) the Fabulous. # Great Modron March, The When the gears of the plane of Mechanus (see chap- ter 6) complete seventeen cycles---once every 289 years---the modron (MOE-dron) leader, Primus, sends a vast army of modrons across the Outer Planes. The purpose of this march is unclear. Most believe it to be a data-gathering mission meant to ascertain Tre Great Mooron Marcw the current state of the cosmos, but some see it as reconnaissance aimed at some future act of con- quest. The march is long and dangerous, and only a small number of modrons returns to Mechanus. GRUUMSH Gruumsh (GROOMSH) is a warring god who is often described as the creator or patron of the orc people. Some orcs attribute their tenacity and toughness to Gruumsh's lingering influence. Some myths de- scribe a primeval conflict between Gruumsh and Corellon, which resulted in Gruumsh losing one eye and Corellon's spilled blood becoming the first elves. HADAR Hadar (HAY-dar or ha-DARR), the Dark Hunger, is an ancient stellar entity originating from the Far Realm (see chapter 6). It appears as a cinder-red dying star, barely visible in the night sky, and it si- phons life from its minions to avert its own demise. Two widely used Warlock spells invoke Hadar's power (see the Arms of Hadar and Hunger of Hadar spells in the Player's Handbook), and a few Warlocks claim this Elder Evil as their Great Old One patron. HARPERS, THE The Harpers is a scattered network of spellcasters and spies in the Forgotten Realms setting. Its mem- bers advocate equality and covertly oppose the abuse of power, magical or otherwise. The Harpers has risen, been shattered, and risen again several times. The faction's longevity and resilience are largely due to its decentralized, grassroots, secretive nature and the autonomy of its members. It has small cells and lone operatives throughout the Forgotten Realms, although they interact and share information with one another as the need arises. The Harpers' ideology is noble, and members pride themselves on their ingenuity and incorruptibility. Harpers don't seek power or glory, only fair treatment for all. # Heroes Of The Lance, The The adventurers known as the Heroes of the Lance, whose deeds helped prevent Takhisis (see Tiamat) and her evil dragons from conquering the world of the Dragonlance setting, began as a small group of young adventurers and their aging dwarf men- tor. This original group (known as the Innfellows) consisted of Tanis Half-Elven, the brothers Raistlin and Caramon Majere, Sturm Brightblade, a kender (similar to a halfling) named Tasslehoff Burrfoot, the dwarf Flint Fireforge, and Kitiara Uth Matar, Raistlin and Caramon's older half-sister. While Kiti- ara eventually joined Takhisis's service, the heroes were joined by others: Riverwind and Goldmoon, from the nomadic peoples of the plains; Gilthanas and Laurana, elf friends from Tanis's childhood; and Tika Waylan, a young barmaid whom the original Innfellows remembered as just a kid. # Heroes Of The Realm, The The so-called "heroes of the Realm" are a group of young adventurers---Bobby, Diana, Eric, Hank, Presto, and Sheila---who traveled from Earth in the 1980s into a world in the D&D multiverse. Equipped with powerful magic items, they foiled the schemes of foes such as Venger and Tiamat while seeking some means to return home. Eventually, as the he- roes' mastery of adventuring skills increased, they discovered the secrets of traveling between worlds, though they still haven't found a way home. The heroes of the Realm weren't the only kids transported from Earth to the worlds of D&D, Other young adventurers, including Niko the Cleric, are still exploring the vast D&D multiverse. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY 357 358 # Icewind Dale Icewind Dale is the northernmost settled region of the Forgotten Realms setting. Freezing wind sweeps across the tundra, finding its way through every crack and draining any hint of warmth. Between the ice cliffs of the eastern glacier, the snowcapped peaks of the mountains to the south, and the Sea of Moving Ice to the north and west, ten small towns cluster around three icy lakes. IGGWILV Before she changed her name and conquered enough of Eastern Oerik (the Greyhawk setting) to rightfully call herself the Witch Queen of Per- renland, Iggwilv (IGG-wilv) was known as Tasha, a human mage who began her career as the appren- tice of Zagig Yragerne (see Zagyg). Later, as an adventurer, she created several new spells, includ- ing Tasha's Hideous Laughter and Tasha's Bubbling Cauldron, leaning on the teachings of her adoptive mother, the arch-hag Baba Yaga. As Tasha grew in power and made powerful enemies, she changed her name to Iggwilv. In this guise, she became enchanted with the power of the Abyss and wrote the definitive treatise on demonkind: the Demonom- icon of Iggwilv (see chapter 7), She also bound and trapped the demon lord Graz'zt (see chapter 6). Iggwilv ruled Perrenland as a tyrant. When Graz'zt escaped his magical prison, Iggwilv went into hiding. Iggwilv's current location is unknown, but she left behind a cambion son (Iuz), who has his mother's tyrannical bent, and a daughter (Drelnza), who is now a vampire and lairs in the Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (see "Greyhawk Gazetteer" in chapter 5), not far from her mother's old haunts. luz luz (EYE-ooze or eye-OOZE) is a cambion and the son of Iggwilv and Graz''zt (see chapter 6). He is every bit as evil as his father and as bent on conquest as his mother at her very worst. He rules a significant portion of Eastern Oerik (in the Greyhawk setting), and some fear that he aspires to conquer even more territory. See "Greyhawk's Premise" in chapter 5. # Jallarzi Sallavarian The youngest and most recently appointed member of the Circle of Eight (see chapter 5), Jallarzi Salla- varian (juh-LAR-zee sal-ah-VAIR-ee-en) is a Warlock with a celestial patron. She is more inclined toward good than the more neutral members of the Circle of Eight and enjoys wandering the Free City of Greyhawk (see chapter 5) in disguise, monitoring sinister elements of society there. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY # Kas The Betrayer Kas (KOSS) is a vampire, legendary swordfighter, and ruthless warlord. He once served as the leader of Vecna's armies and the lich's most trusted lieu- tenant, and he wielded a sword made for him (the Sword of Kas, described in chapter 7) by his liege. But the evil sword convinced Kas to betray Vecna, and now Kas is driven primarily by his hatred for his former lord. KERAPTIS According to legend, Keraptis (kuh-RAP-tiss) was an evil archmage who long ago seized power as a petty tyrant somewhere in the northern mountains of the Greyhawk setting. When his demands on the local populace became too extreme, a revolt drove him into hiding. He disappeared into the tunnels beneath White Plume Mountain (see "Greyhawk's Premise" in chapter 5). It's conceivable that he became a lich as the grim climax of his magical research. THE witarRo TASHA, BEFORE SHE BECAME loowity THE Witch Queen Kyuss Variously identified as an Elder Evil, as a demigod, or as a mortal priest of the demon lord Orcus (see chapter 6), Kyuss (KYE-uss) is a mysterious figure best known as the Worm That Walks. Kyuss man- ifests on the Material Plane as a colossal mass of maggots and worms animated by a single evil will. # Laeral Silverhand Laeral (LAIR-ull) Silverhand is the fifth of seven daughters of Mystra, a deity of magic in the Forgot- ten Realms setting. (Alustriel Silverhand is Laeral's older sister.) She is over 700 years old, and after a period of withdrawal from public life, she now serves as the Open Lord of Waterdeep---the only one of the twenty or so Lords of Waterdeep whose identity is publicly known. Though her power has waxed and waned depending on Mystra's involve- ment with the world and has declined significantly in recent years, Laeral remains one of the most formidable spellcasters in a world known for powerful spellcasters. # League Of Malevolence, The The League of Malevolence is an odious assemblage of villains united in one purpose: the accumulation of power. Its founding member, Kelek the Sorcerer, expects his confederates to work together for their mutual benefit, but he also encourages them to pur- sue their own evil schemes. Other members include the remorseless killer for hire Warduke, the assas- sin Zarak, and the evil Zargash, a servant of Orcus. Skylla, a Warlock whose power derives from a pact with Baba Yaga, maintains a tenuous alliance with the league but despises Kelek. Lorp SOTH Lord Soth is a death knight in the Dragonlance setting---a former Paladin who allowed his pride to lead him into evil. Offered an opportunity to re- deem himself by averting a cataclysmic event, his pride again led him to abandon his quest and allow the devastation of his world. His mortal life ended in that cataclysm, but he rose from the ashes into undeath and retreated to his cursed castle, Dar- gaard Keep. He ignored the outside world for many centuries until the Dragon Queen Takhisis (see Tiamat) called him forth to serve her in the War of the Lance. MENZOBERRANZAN The Underdark city of Menzoberranzan (men-zoh- buh-RAN-zan), lying far beneath the Sword Coast region of the Forgotten Realms, is ruled by tyran- nical priests of the Demon Queen of Spiders, Lolth (see chapter 6). Most of its people are drow, whose noble houses are locked in a constant struggle for Lolth's favor and the power that comes with it. MINSC Minsc (MINSK) is a heroic Ranger from the land of Rashemen in the Forgotten Realms setting. Known for his good cheer, his hearty optimism, and his pet miniature giant space hamster, Boo, Minsc is partic- ularly adored in the city of Baldur's Gate. MITHRAL Mithral (MITH-ral) is a light, flexible metal that re- sembles silver but is much more durable. Its most common use is for crafting lightweight armor that provides excellent protection without bulk or bur- den (see the Mithral Armor magic item in chapter 7). MORADIN Myths told on many worlds describe Moradin (MORE-ah-din) crafting all the peoples of the Mate- rial Plane in his great workshop in Mount Celestia (see chapter 6), causing them to spring to life from inert metal when he cooled the heated castings with his breath. These myths are the source of Mora- din's appellation, "All-Father." Many peoples across the multiverse, including many dwarves, worship Moradin. MORDENKAINEN Mordenkainen (mor-den-KIGH-nen or mor-den- KAY-nen) is a human archmage who maintains a residence in the Free City of Greyhawk and APPENDIX A\| LORE GLOSSARY 359 360 another hidden somewhere in the Yatil Mountains between Perrenland and Ket (see chapter 5). He is the founder and leader of the Circle of Eight, which he created to implement his philosophy of balance in the world. Among Mordenkainen's cele- brated accomplishments are several name-branded spells, including ones that create extradimensional mansions, swords of spectral force, and phantom watchdogs (detailed in the Player's Handbook). Mordenkainen has visited numerous worlds and planes of existence, making friends and fomenting rivalries on many of them. He maintains a close friendship with his former apprentice Bigby and the famous archmage Elminster of Shadowdale. Mordenkainen's greatest rival is Iggwilv, a former adventuring companion. NEVERWINTER Once known in the Forgotten Realms setting as the Jewel of the North, the city of Neverwinter was badly damaged when a nearby volcano erupted about fifty years ago. Now, its people work furiously to rebuild. Some of its outer walls still lie in ruins, and several of its neighborhoods remain abandoned. Dagult Neverember is the Lord Protector of Nev- erwinter, ruling in the absence of a true heir to the crown. His dream is to see Neverwinter eclipse nearby Waterdeep in wealth and prosperity. OTILUKE Otiluke (AW-teh-luke) is an impulsive, aggressive Wizard who is the main agent of the Circle of Eight in the Free City of Greyhawk (see chapter 5). He holds a position of political power and keeps his membership in the Circle of Eight secret. He is best known for his spells that create magical spheres (de- tailed in the Player's Handbook). OTTO Otto (AW-toe) is an affable dwarf Bard with a taste for fine food, good music, and expensively tailored clothes. His sociable and outgoing personality masks the fact that he's also a member of the Circle of Eight (see chapter 5) and committed to the goals of that organization. He is well-known across the multiverse for his creation of the Otto's Irresistible Dance spell. PHANDALIN The frontier town of Phandalin (FAN-duh-lin or fan- DAY-lin) in the Sword Coast region of the Forgotten Realms setting is built on the ruins of a much older settlement. Hundreds of years ago, old Phandalin was a thriving town until it was sacked by bandits and lay abandoned for centuries. In the past few years, hardy folk from the cities of Neverwinter and Waterdeep have begun settling atop the ruins of old Phandalin. It's now home to APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY farmers, woodcutters, fur traders, and prospectors drawn by stories of gold and platinum in the foot- hills of the Sword Mountains---as well as more than a few ruffians and bandits. PRINCE OF Frost, THE The Prince of Frost is a son of Titania, the Summer Queen. He was once known as the Sun Prince, but his heart grew cold when he was spurned by the fey noble he loved. He is now a creature of wrath and winter, ruling from his Fortress of Frozen Tears in the Vale of Long Night in the Feywild (see chapter 6). He detests mortals of the Material Plane and dreams of covering their many worlds with perpet- ual winter. # Queen Of Air And Darkness, The The mysterious Queen of Air and Darkness is the archfey ruler of the Gloaming Court in the Feywild (see chapter 6). Though she is often described as malicious and evil, her motivations are as obscure and whimsical as any other archfey's. She gives supernatural boons and terrible curses with equal whimsy, with little regard for the elaborate customs surrounding gifts and favors in other courts of the Feywild. Though she is said to have a spectral form resembling a terrifying elf, to the unaided eye she appears as a strange, black diamond, hovering in the air like the slitted pupil of an unseen cat. Tre Prince or Frosr Tae Raven Quen RAVEN QUEEN, THE The Raven Queen is a being of mystery. Those who claim to have encountered her have described an array of disturbing images: a terrible shadow that clawed at their innermost thoughts, a pale and regal elf who exploded into an untold number of ravens, a shambling tangle of slick roots and sticks that over- whelmed them with dread, or an unknown presence that pulled them screaming into the gloom. Despite all attempts to demystify her, the Raven Queen has remained enigmatic and aloof. She rules from her Raven Throne within the Fortress of Memories, a mazelike castle deep within the bleak- ness of the Shadowfell (see chapter 6). From there she sends out her raven servants to find interesting souls she can pluck from the planes of existence. Once these souls are in the Shadowfell, she watches as they attempt to unravel the mystery of their being. ROcK OF BRAL, THE Bral is a city built on an asteroid that drifts through Wildspace (see chapter 6). Its inhabitants, who hail from many worlds across the Material Plane, typ- ically refer to Bral as the Rock. There is no other place quite like it in Wildspace---a teeming hive of business that spans the breadth of the Astral Sea. Bral is populated by an outlandish collection of traders, scoundrels, mercenaries, pirates, nobles, and entrepreneurs. Generally, law enforcement is sporadic, which means that order is elusive. Most folks who call the Rock home adhere to two prin- ciples: mind your own business whenever possible, and enough gold can fix anything. # Rudolph Van Richten A scholar and monster hunter, Rudolph van Richten has traveled to dozens of Domains of Dread in the Shadowfell (see chapter 6), investigating reports of monstrous beings and documenting them in a series of published guides, the best known of which is Van Richten's Guide to Vampires. In kinder days, Rudolph lived with his wife, In- grid, and son, Erasmus, but he lost them both to a wicked vampire. In the process of hunting the vam- pire, Rudolph came under a terrible curse: "Live you always among monsters, and see everyone you love die beneath their claws." In the decades since, van Richten has hunted mon- sters and armed others with the knowledge they need to confront evil. Though he's made many devoted allies, he keeps them at arm's length, fearing the threat of his curse. Van Richten is closely associated with other he- roes who prowl the Domains of Dread, including the detective Alanik Ray and his partner Arthur Sedgwick, the explorer Ez d'Avenir, and the twins Gennifer and Laurie Weathermay-Foxgrove. # Strahd Von Zarovich A brilliant thinker and capable warrior in life, Strahd von Zarovich (STRAWD von zuh-ROH-vitch or ZAR-oh-vitch) fought in countless battles for his people. After a long life of warfare and slaughter, he settled in the remote valley of Barovia and built a castle on a towering pinnacle. His brother Sergei came to live with him in Castle Ravenloft, becom- ing Strahd's adviser and constant companion. In his brother, Strahd saw everything he was not. Resentment colored their relationship and eventu- ally turned into hatred. Strahd's beloved, Tatyana, spurned Strahd for Sergei, whom she pledged to marry. In a desperate attempt to regain Tatyana's love, Strahd forged a pact with dark powers that made him immortal. Strahd confronted his brother at Ser- gei and Tatyana's wedding and killed him. Tatyana fled and flung herself from Ravenloft's walls. Guards shot Strahd with arrows, but he didn't die. He be- came a vampire---the first vampire, according to many sages. In the centuries since his transformation, Strahd's lust for life has grown. He broods in his castle, curs- ing the living for all he has lost and never admitting to his role in the tragedy. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY 361 Tre Summer Queen # Summer Queen, The Titania, the Summer Queen, is the regal and char- ismatic ruler of the Summer Court in the Feywild (see chapter 6). Perhaps the mightiest of the arch- fey, she can ripen a crop with a smile and summon wildfires with the merest crinkling of her brow. SworpD Coast, THE The Sword Coast is the western edge of the conti- nent of the Forgotten Realms setting, running along the Sea of Swords. It's a narrow band of territory dominated by several major city-states, from Nev- erwinter in the north to Baldur's Gate in the south, with Waterdeep in between. Szass TAM Szass Tam (ZASS TAM) is a powerful lich and necro- mancer in the Forgotten Realms setting. As leader of the Red Wizards of Thay, he has countless spies, assassins, and other agents at his service, and his schemes span centuries and reach to the ends of the world. TASHA See Iggwilv. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY THARIZDUN For a being known as the Chained God, the Elder Evil Tharizdun (thuh-RIZZ-dun or thair-izz-DOON) has managed to extend his baleful influence from the Greyhawk setting through many worlds of the Material Plane. He is an ancient force of entropy, the end of all things and the extinction of life. His worshipers are nihilists who seek to end all worlds by liberating their god. Tharizdun is often linked to cults of Elemental Evil (see chapter 5). TIAMAT Tiamat (TEE-a-mat) is one of the primordial dragons who (along with Bahamut) is said to have created the First World. Since the destruction of the First World, she has made her home in the Nine Hells (see chapter 6), where she is served by devils and enjoys the worship of mortals across the multiverse. In the Dragonlance setting, where she is known as Takhi- sis (ta-KEE-sis), she is the greatest of the gods of evil. On many worlds, she is known as a god of greed, wealth, and vengeance. Chromatic dragons might fear, respect, envy, and appease Tiamat as a sovereign, but they don't wor- ship her. Their devotion to her rarely supersedes their devotion to their own goals. # Underdark, The The Underdark is a vast subterranean realm of nat- ural caverns and passages extending far beneath the surface of most D&D worlds. Many creatures inhabit the Underdark, including drow, duergar, svirfneblin, and other species that have adapted to the world below the surface. UNDERMOUNTAIN Undermountain is the largest, deepest dungeon in the Forgotten Realms setting. It's a series of inter- connected dungeon levels sprawling far beneath the city of Waterdeep. Its tunnels connect to pre- existing mithral mines and natural caverns of the Underdark. The best-known entrance to Under- mountain is through the Yawning Portal tavern in Waterdeep, but other routes also exist. A reclusive and cantankerous archmage named Halaster Black- cloak claims Undermountain as his domain, al- though his overlordship isn't widely acknowledged by the dungeon's other denizens. # Vajra Safahr Vajra Safahr (VAWJ-rah sah-FAR) is a human Wiz- ard in her midthirties, making her the youngest person ever to hold the position of Blackstaff---the chief mage of Waterdeep and the head of Blackstaff Academy, a school for mages. Several of the older and more seasoned mages of Waterdeep consider Vajra an upstart, but they are smart enough not to challenge her. As the badge of her office, she carries the Blackstaff, an Artifact that holds the spirits of all her predecessors. # Valor's Call The noble adventuring party known as Valor''s Call was founded by Strongheart, a resolute human Pal- adin committed to destroying evil wherever it rears its head. Strongheart alone determines who can become a member of this prestigious group, and he is always looking for courageous heroes willing to devote themselves to a good cause. Only good-aligned characters can join Valor's Call. The group enjoys the patronage of Yolande, the queen of Celene, and carries out missions on her behalf both in the Greyhawk setting (see chapter 5) and in the Feywild (see chapter 6). Prominent members of Valor's Call include the dwarf Fighter Elkhorn, the human Cleric Mercion, the human Rogue Molliver, and the human Wizard Ringlerun. VECNA Vecna (VECK-nah) had humble beginnings in the Greyhawk setting, where an order of Wizards used him as a bootblack and scribe. He studied magic in secret until he amassed enough power to slaughter the order, and then he turned his efforts toward scribing the Book of Vile Darkness (described in chapter 7). Armed with that dread tome, he forged a kingdom to rule, with the vampire Kas as his lieutenant. But Kas betrayed and killed him, leaving only one hand and one eye intact (the Eye and Hand of Vecna are described in chapter 7). Vecna's evil will was so great that he persisted beyond death and eventually became a demigod of secrets and evil magic. His ambition drives him to pursue greater divine power across the multiverse. VENGER Venger (VEN-jur) was once both human and good- hearted, but some fiendish force transformed him into a winged, one-horned villain. His schemes have spanned centuries and worlds, as he seeks to seize ever-increasing magical power. He has a particular loathing for Tiamat and longs to overthrow her. He is often seen astride a flying black steed, his shad- owy adviser in tow. VI Vi (VYE) is a gnome artificer, entrepreneur, and traveler of many worlds who originally hails from Eberron. After helping to create terribly destructive weapons during the Last War, Vi sought to atone for this guilt by establishing the Fixers, an organiza- tion dedicated to solving apparently hopeless prob- lems. From the Fixers' headquarters in Sigil, Vi has brought her genius, warm heart, and love for a stiff drink to many worlds across the multiverse. VLAAKITH Vlaakith (VLAH-kith) is the lich-queen of the githyanki city of Tu'narath, adrift in the Astral Plane (see chapter 6). She is ancient, having fought alongside a leader named Gith to win her people's freedom from the mind flayers that enslaved them. Githyanki of Tu'narath swear unquestioning obe- dience to the lich-queen, and she promises access to paradise to those who serve her loyally. In truth, she feasts on the souls of any subjects who grow powerful enough to dream of challenging her. WATERDEEP Waterdeep is the most famous and cosmopolitan city in the Forgotten Realms setting. It's a center of wealth and influence where people come to make their dreams come true. The city is home to the Yawning Portal, the best-known point of access to the sprawling dungeon of Undermountain. XANATHAR Xanathar (ZAN-a-thar) is an eccentric beholder crime lord dwelling beneath Waterdeep. Desiring to APPENDIX A\| LOREGLOSSARY 363 364. know all there is to know, Xanathar collects knowl- edge from across the multiverse, but its most prized possession is its goldfish, Sylgar. # Yawning Portal, The The Yawning Portal is a tavern in Waterdeep, built around an entrance to the infamous dungeon of Un- dermountain. Adventurers throughout the Forgot- ten Realms setting and elsewhere in the multiverse visit the Yawning Portal to exchange knowledge about Undermountain and other dungeons. Most visitors are content to swap stories by the hearth, but some adventurers pay the toll for entry into Undermountain (collected by the mysterious owner and bartender, Durnan). YOLANDE Yolande (yoh-LAWND), known as the Faerie Queen, is the benevolent and beloved elf monarch of Celene (see chapter 5). Raised in the court of the Summer Queen, Yolande had no wish to rule. She preferred the life of an adventuring magic-user. She built her reputation on triumphs, such as her capture of the fomorian brigand Solgna and the theft of the Prince of Frost's sentient sword, Winterflash. Yolande was among the first elves to migrate from the Feywild to the Greyhawk setting. ZAGYG The archmage Zagig Yragerne (ZAG-igg EE-rag-airn) was an adventurer in the Greyhawk setting and a member of the Company of Seven. At the climax of a long and prosperous adventuring career, he built a fortress known as Castle Greyhawk outside the Free City of Greyhawk (see chapter 5). From this stronghold, he took an increasingly powerful role in the politics of the city, contributing to its repu- tation as "the Gem of the Flanaess." He obsessively delved deeper under his castle and withdrew from the outside world until he managed to entrap nine demigods in magical prisons and claim a fragment of their divine power. He ascended to a minor form of godhood, took the name Zagyg, and took a place in the court of Boccob, a god of magic. ZARGON Zargon (ZAR-gawn) is an Elder Evil---an undying abomination from eons past with an insatiable appetite. A tentacled, slime-covered horror with a cyclopic red eye and an indestructible horn, Zargon corrupts creatures it doesn't devour, transforming its victims into amorphous servants. Zargon is im- prisoned on the Material Plane in a prison deep in the earth. This prison is described in the Quests from the Infinite Staircase adventure anthology. APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY # Xanathar 15 A Tyrannical Crime Lord # As Well As A Beholoer mr # Appendix B Barrow Carver APPENDIX B \| MAPS j 365 Caravan ENcamement 366 APPENDIX B\| MAPS ------ i Pager d'a a ae: { 1 Square = 25 Feet Crossroads Vittace - es APPENDIX B\|MAPS 9367 ------ 2 Ae 8 CRN pRrRL ITE "4 a Pn tb, ade pile \> Met, b PE 1 ZN Dracon's Lair 368 APPENDIX B\| MAPS Surface Level MANIC E IS SIF\< SINE at 7) c ay WAI Uv 1 Square = 5 Feet Tg gy ee Aig gid "Gob DUNGEON NiogouT APPENDIXB\| MAPS 369 FARMSTEAD a APPENDIX B \| MAPS 370 "i. Rr ar 1 Squaré = 5 Feet oe =\< at. =; +s err. Keep APPENDIX B \| MAPS 371 APPENDIX B \| MAPS 372 is / SALI SAAN SIMI ANSE - Slope Dow te. Mine APPENDIX B \| MAPS 373 is oH tT suze a aanenene re rire rear i att Roaosioe Inn 374 APPENDIX B\| MAPS 5 Feet\_\_! \_1 Square = oS oe APPENDIX B \| MAPS i \| » \|OlO rilt duty jj} hd 4 oe. is. che \ 3: Cellars \% £ 1 Square = 5 Feet APPENDIX B \| MAPS 376 Psarh Seooky Mouse f are o } Bt ---+ ta 4: \* a, A XS Ground Floor | as y ei +++. \* Me bd. We it H UNOERDARK WARREN 377 APPENDIX B \| MAPS Voucanic Caves a hoe APPENDIX B \| MAPS 378 oo ee \_\_\| Dungeons = Si eA \ SS DAS. a oie \ Wizaro's Tower APPENDIX B\|MAPS 379 Aaqa, 188 Abellio, 183 Abilities, Ability Checks, and Saving Throws table, 28 ability checks, 27 group checks, 28 in exploration, 34 in social interaction, 33 passive checks, 28 proficiency, 27 absent players, 24 Abyss, 174, 180 Acererak, 354 Acheron, 174, 182 Acheronian Bloodlust pew effect, 69 acknowledge the incredible, 141 acting, 21 actions in exploration, 34 activating a magic item, 218 adamantine, 354 Adamantine Armor, 227 Adamantine Weapon, 227 adding basic facilities, 335 Advantage, 29 adventure, 7 conflict, 106 creating an, 105 denouement, 120 ending, 120 examples, 122 first, 139 hooks, 110 inhabitants, 109 keeping moving, 112 linking, 139 maps, 109 patrons, 110 premise, 105 p ss, 113 published, 105 rewards, 120 setting, 109 situations by level, 106 situations tables, 107 social contract of, 18 step-by-step, 105 stockpile, 129 Adventure Climax table, 120 Adventure Connections table, 140 Adventurers and Organizations sidebar, 147 Agathion, 206 Agathys, 187 aids to improvisation, 31 Air, Elemental Plane of, 188 Alchemy jue 227 alien technology, 73 alignment, 51 character, 51 deities, 74 NPCs, 84 Outer Planes, 174, 176 altitude, high, 69 Alustriel Silverhand, 354 Ammunition, +1, +2, or +3, 228 ammunition, firearm, 72 ammunition, magic, 217 Ammunition of Slaying, 228 Amoria, 191 Amulet of Health, 228 Amulet of Proof against Detection and Location, 228 Amulet of the Planes, 229 Animated Shield, 229 anachronistic thinking, See character knowledge, 18 answers, improvising, 31 Antimatter Rifle, 73 antisocial behavior, 19 Apparatus of Kwalish, 229 Aquallor, 183 A Question of Enmity sidebar, 250 Arborea, 174, 183 Arcadia, 69, 174, 183 Arcadian Vitality planar effect, 69 arcana (treasure), 213, 326 Arcane Study Bastion facility, 336 archdevils, 205 Archive Bastion facility, 338 areas of effect, 44 and mobs, 82 Are Magic Items Necessary? sidebar, 218 armaments (treasure), 213, 328 Armor, +1, +2, or +3, 230 Armor magic item category, 216 Armor of Gleaming, 230 Armor of invulnerability, 230 Armor of Resistance, 231 Armor of Vulnerability, 231 Armory Bastion facility, 339 Arrow-Catching Shield, 231 Artifacts, 224 destroying, 220 art objects tables, 215 Arvandor, 183 Ash, Plane of, 207 Ashardalon, 354 Asmodeus, 204 Assassin's Blood poison, 90 A Starting Campaign sidebar, 122 Astral Color Pools table, 184 Astral Plane, 184 atmosphere, 13, 26, 119 attack rolls, 29 INDEX attitude, 32 and alignment, 51 initial, 116 attunement, 217 Audible Distance table, 36 Automata, 206 Automatic Rifle, 73 Avalas, 182 Avatar of Death stat block, 252 Avernus, 202 avoiding a fight, 48 Awarding Heroic Inspiration sidebar, 46 awarding magic items, 218 awarding XP, 48 Axe of the Dwarvish Lords, 231 Azzagrat, 180 Baalzebul, 203 Baba Yaga, 354 Baba Yaga's Dancin Broom, 232 5% background, creating a, i of Beans, 233 rod of Devouring, 234 Bag of Holding, 234 se of Tricks, 234 Bahamut, 354 Baldur's Gate, 355 Ballista siege equipment, 96 Baphomet, 182 Barovia, 209, 355 Barrack Bastion facility, 339 barred doors, 64 basic facilities, 335 Bastion, 333 basic facilities, 335 combining, 334 event, 350 fall of a, 352 gaining a, 333 irelings, 336 map, 334 orders, 336 special facilities, 335 turns, 333 Bastion Events table, 350 Bastion Tracker sheet, 353 Bastion Tracker sidebar, 352 battle grid, 7, 44 Bead of Force, 234 Bead of Nourishment, 235 Bead of hment, 235 Beastlands, 174, 186 becoming lost. See navigation, 40 Bedlam, 206 behavior, monster, 116 Belial, 202 Belierin, 191 Belt of Dwarvenkind, 235 Belt of Giant Strength, 236 Berserker Axe, 236 Bigby, 146, 355 Black Dragon Inn, 152 Blackrazor, 236 Blessed Beneficence planar effect, 69 Blessing, 98 Blessing of Health, 98 Blessing of Magic Resistance, 98 Blessing of Protection, 99 Blessing of Understanding, 99 Blessing of Valhalla, 99 Blessing of Weapon Enhancement, 99 Blessing of Wound Closure, 99 Blood War, 178 Bomb, 72 bond (NPC), See personality, NPC, 86 Boo, 355 Book of Exalted Deeds, 237 Book of Vile Darkness, 238 Boots of Elvenkind, 239 Boots of False Tracks, 239 Boots of Levitation, 239 Boots of Speed, 240 Boots of Striding and inging, 240 Boots o} the Winterlands, 240 Borca, 209 Border Ethereal, 192 Boreal Ball adventure, 125 Bowl of Commanding Water Elementals, 240 Bracers of Archery, 240 Bracers of Defense, 241 Brazier of Commanding Fire El Is, 241 break episodes, 141 Bright Desert, 147 bringing a location to life, 109 bringing back the dead, 63 bringing the party together, 137 Brooch of Shielding, 241 Broom of Flying, 241 brown mold hazard, 76 Brux, 186 Building a Trap table, 103 Build Your Own Pantheon sidebar, 74 Burnt Othur Fumes poison, 90 Burst Fire property, 72 Buxenus, 183 buying magic items, 217 Bytopia, 174, 186 Cackle Fever magical contagion, 61 calculated DCs, 29 campaign, 127 characters, 129 concurrent, 25 conflicts, 131 creating a, 127 ending a, 142 journal, 7, 127 premise, 129 setting, 136 start, 137 step-by-step, 127 time in the, 142 Campaign Conflicts sheet, 132 Campaign Journal sheet, 128 Candle of Invocation, 241 Candle of the Deep, 242 Cania, 204 Cannon siege equipment, 96 Cape of the Mountebank, 242 Cap of Water Breathing, 242 Carceri, 174, 187 card accessories, 7 Carpet of Flying, 242 Carrion Crawler Mucus poison, 90 Castle Ravenloft, 355 Cast-Off Armor, 243 Cathrys, 187 Cauldron of Rebirth, 243 Censer of Controlling Air Elementals, 243 central Flanaess, 162 Chamada, 197 character advancement, 48 character alignment, 51 character arcs, 129 character creation, 137 character k e, 18 character objectives, 112 character sheets, 6 charges, 220 Charlatan's Die, 243 Charm, 99 Charm of Animal Conjuring, 99 Charm of Darkvision, 99 Charm of Feather Falling, 33 \| Charm of Heroism, 99 Charm of Restoration, 99 Charm of the Slayer, 99 Charm of Vitality, 99 chases, 52 Chime of Opening, 244 Chronias, 201 Cinder Wastes, 189 Circle of Eight, 146 Circlet of Blasting, 244 Citadel of Ten Thousand Pearls, 190 city, 93 City of Brass, 189 City of Doors (Sigil), 210 City of Jewels, 189 clichés, 111 Cloak of Arachnida, 244 Cloak of Billowing, 244 Cloak of Displacement, 244 Cloak of Elvenkind, 244 Cloak of invisibility, 244 Cloak of Many Fashions, 245 Cloak of Protection, 245 Cloak of the Bat, 245 Cloak of the Manta Ray, 245 Clockwork Amulet, 245 Clothes of Mending, 245 Cocytus, 206 coins, 213 cold, extreme, 68 collapsing roof trap, 100 color pools, Astral, 184 Colothys, 187 combat, 42 keeping moving, 47 narrating, 46 combat encounters, 114 adjusting difficulty, 48 command word, 220 Common Map Symbols diagram, 109 Companions of the Hall, 355 Company of Seven, 355 conditions, using and tracking, 43 conflict, adventure, 106 conflict, intra-party, 17 conflict arcs, 131 conflict with a sentient item, 227 consequences, 30 consumable iterns, 220 contact poison, 90 contagions, magical, 67 contests. See calculated OCs, 29 Corellon, 355 cosmology, 173 cover, 45 crafting magic items, 220 creating a background, 55 creating a creature, 56 creating adventures, 105 creating a magic item, 58 creating a spell, 59 creating campaigns, 127 creating religions, 75 creating your own setting, 136 creature, creating a, 56 Creature Costs by Challenge Rating table, 343 Creature Size and Space table, 44 Creature traits, 57 critical failure, 30 critical success, 30 crossing the streams, 135 Crypts, 67 Crystal Ball, 245 Crystal Ball of Mind Reading, 246 Crystal Ball of Telepathy, 246 Crystal Ball of True Seeing, 246 Cube of Force, 246 Cube of Summoning, 247 Cubic Gate, 247 cursed items, 220 curses, 60 Curst, 206 D&D Settings table, 136 Daern's Instant Fortress, 247 Dagger of Venom, 248 damage, improvising, 30 Damage Severity and Level table, 31 Dancing Sword, 248 Darkened Depths, 191 Dark Shard Amulet, 248 Dark Sun, 136 Days of the Week table (Greyhawk), 146 dead gods, 184 dead magic zone, 68 death, 62 Death Dells, 182 Decanter of Endless Water, 249 Deck of Illusions, 249 Deck of Many Things, 250 Deep Ethereal, 192 deep water, 68 defeated, not dead, 63 fender, 252 defenders, prepared, 118 degrees of failure, 30 rees of success, 30 deity. See gods and other powers, 74 delegation, 13 Delina, 355 demigods, 74 Demiplane Bastion facility, 340 Demiplanes, 187 Demogorgon, 180 Demon Armor, 252 demonic possession, 60 Demonomicon of Iggwilv, 252 Demonweb, 180 denouement, 120 Describing Actions table, 46 designing dungeon rooms, 66 diagonal movement, 45 Diancastra, 356 dice, 6 die rolling, OM, 17 die rolling, player, 18 Difficulty Class (DC), 29 Dimensional Shackles, 254 Dis, 202 Disadvantage, 29 disease. See magical contagions, 61 Dispater, 202 divine intervention, 75 divine knowledge, 75 divine magic, 74 divine rank, 74 DM.-controlled adventurer ("DM PC"), 23 DM die rolling, 17 DM's Character Tracker sheet, 130 DMs, multiple, 25 DM's toolbox, 51 DM screen, 7 DM tips, 5 Do \| Need a Settlement Map? sidebar, 93 Domains of Delight, 195 Domains of Dread, 208 Don't Go Overboard sidebar, 88 Doors table, 64 Do Players Need to Track Rations? sidebar, 40 Dothion, 186 Do You Really Do That? sidebar, 17 Dragonlance, 136 Dragon Scale Mail, 254 dragons, chromatic, 143 Dragon Slayer, 254 draw in the players, 110 Dread Helm, 254 Driftglobe, 254 Drizzt Do'Urden, 356 Drow Poison. See Lolth's Sting poison, 91 dungeon, 65 decay, 67 designing rooms, 66 ecology, 109 mapping, 66 Dungeon Master (DM), 5 Dungeon Quirks table, 65 Dust of Disappearance, 255 Dust of Dryness, 255 Dust of Sneezing and Choking, 255 Dwarven Plate, 255 Owarven Thrower, 256 Dynamite Stick, 72 Ear Hom of Hearing, 256 Earth, Elemental Plane of, 189 eastern Flanaess, 164 Eberron, 136 Efreeti Bottle, 256 Efreeti Chain, 257 Elder Evils, 356 Elemental Chaos, 174 Elemental Evil, 144, 188, 189, 190 Elemental Gem, 257 Elemental Plane of Air, 188 Elemental Plane of Earth, 189 Elemental Plane of Fire, 189 Elemental Plane of Water, 190 Elemental Planes, 174 Elixir of Health, 257 Elminster, 356 Elven Chain, 257 Elysium, 174, 191 Empyrea, 201 encounter, 9 appealing to players, 113 combat, 114 during travel, 40 exploration, 114 objectives, 112 pace, 118 plan, 112 random, 119 social interaction, 114 tension, 118 with other creatures, 40 ending a campaign, 142 ending a fight, 48 ending an adventure, 120 ending a session, 10 Endless Maze, 182 Enduring Spellbook, 257 Energy Bow, 257 engaging the players (in social interaction), 32 enlarging basic facilities, 335 Enspelled Armor, 258 Enspelled Staff, 258 Enspelled Weapon, 258 ensuring fun for all, 15 environmental effects, 68 epic fantasy, 133 episodes, 139 Ersatz Eye, 259 Eronia, 191 Escape Factors table, 53 Essence of Ether poison, 91 Ether Cyclone table, 193 Ethereal Curtains table, 193 Ethereal Plane, 192 Euryale, 356 events, timed, 142 Eversmoking Bottle, 259 every DM is unique, 13 evil characters, 19, 51 example of play, 10 Exandria, 136 Excelsior, 206 Executioner's Axe, 259 expectations, 15 Experience Points (XP), 48 Expert Trainers table, 348 exploiting the rules, players, 19 exploration, 33 ability checks in, 34 actions in, 34 encounters, 114 exploring, 21 explosives, 72 Explosives table, 73 extended travel, 38 extreme cold, 68 extreme heat, 68 Eye and Hand of Vecna, 259 Eyes of Charming, 261 Eyes of Minute Seeing, 261 Eyes of the Eagle, 261 Fablerise, 195 Facility Space table, 335 factions, 109, 146 Falkovnia, 209 Fallbacks, 356 falling net trap, 100 fall of a Bastion, 352 Far Realm, 194 Faunel, 206 favors, 81 fear, 70 festivals (Greyhawk), 146 fey crossings, 195 Feywild, 195 Feywild Time Warp table, 196 mins 202 ighting, 21 fight or flight, 48 Figurine of Wondrous Power, 261 finding players, 6 Fire, Elemental Plane of, 189 firearms, 72 Firearms table, 73 fireball fungus hazard, 76 fire-casting statue trap, 101 first adventure, 139 First World, 198, 356 Fizban, 356 Flamethrower Coach siege equipment, 96 Flame Tongue, 263 Flanaess, 143 central, 162 eastern, 164 northern, 166 western, 170 flavors of fantasy, 131 flaw (NPC). See personality, NPC, 86 flying. See travel pace, 38 Folding Boat, 263 food and water, 40 foraging, 40 forced march. See extended travel, 38 foreshadowing, 127 Forgotten Realms, 136 fortifications, 80 Fortitude, 206 Fouled Stream, The, adventure, 122 Fountains of Creation (Plane of Magma), 207 Fragmentation Grenade, 73 Free City of Greyhawk, 149 and environs, 158 City Watch, 151 crime, 151 gates, 151 'overnment, 1517 ow to use, 150 locations, 152 map, 153 neighborhoods, 152 religion, 152 walls, 151 frigid water, 68 Frost Brand, 263 Frostfell (Plane of Ice), 207 Furnaces, 189 gaining a Bastion, 333 Game Expectations sheet, 14 Gaming Hall Bastion facility, 340 Gaping Maw, 180 Garden Bastion facility, 340 Gate-Towns of the Outlands table, 206 Gauntlets of Ogre Power, 264 Gehenna, 69, 174, 197 Gehennan Cruelty planar effect, 69 Gem of Brightness, 264 Gem of Seeing, 264 gemstones tables, 214 Geryon, 203 getting players invested, 140 Ghost Tower of Inverness, 164 Giant Fly stat block, 261 Giant Slayer, 264 gifts, supernatural, 98 giving information to one Glasya, 203 Gloaming Court, 195 Glorium, 206 Gloves of Missile Snaring, 265 Gloves of Swimming and Climbing, 265 Gloves of Thievery, 265 gods, dead, 184 gods and other powers, 74 Gods of Greyhawk table, 148 Goggles of Night, 265 Grand Citadel, 154 Graz'zt, 180 Great Conflagration (Plane of Ash), 207 greater deities, 74 Great Library, 154 Great Modron March, 356 Great Wheel, 173 Greenhouse Bastion facility, 341 green slime hazard, 76 Grenade Launcher, 73 grenades, 73 Greyhawk, 136, 143 calendar, 146 conflicts, 143 days of the week, 146 factions and organizations, 146 Free City of, 149 gazetteer, 160 gods, 148 magic in, 147 months and festivals, 146 mysteries of, 147 regional map, 161 setting, 145 group checks, 23 group size, 23 Gruumsh, 357 guard posts, 67 Guide Rails and Railroads sidebar, 106 Guildhall Bastion facility, 341 Gunpowder, 73 Hadar, 357 Hades, 174, 197 Hog Eye, 265 Hammer of Thunderbolts, 265 Hai stance Hooks table, 111 Harpers, 357 Hat of Disguise, 266 Hat of Many Spells, 266 Hat of Vermin, 267 Hat of Wizardry, 267 hazards, 76 Headband of Intellect, 268 heat, extreme, 68 heavy precipitation, 69 Helm of Brilliance, 268 Helm of Comprehending Languages, 268 Helm of Telepathy, 268 Helm of Teleportation, 268 Help action (in social interaction), 33 Hepmonaland, 147 Heroes of the Lance, 357 Heroes of the Realm, 357 heroic fantasy, 133 Heroic Inspiration, 46 Heroic Isles, 191 Heward's Handy Haversack, 269 Heward's Handy Spice Pouch, 269 hex crawling, See journeys without destinations, 36 hidden pit trap, 101 hidden things in adventures, 35 high altitude, 69 High Tower Inn, 155 hirelings, Bastion, 336 Hit Points loss of (narrating), 46 tracking, 42 hoards, treasure, 120 Holy Avenger, 269 home lem; and alignment (gods), 74 hooks, adventure, 117 Hopeless, 206 Horn of Blasting, 270 Horn of Silent Alarm, 270 Hom of Valhalla, 270 Horns of the Beast adventure, 124 Horseshoes of a Zephyr, 270 Horseshoes of Speed, 270 house rules, 13 Howler's Crag, 206 how to run a session, 9 Hunting Rifle, 73 Ice, Plane of, 207 ice, 69 Icewind Dale, 358 ideal (NPC). See personality, NPC, 86 Iggwilv, 358 Immovable Rod, 270 implements (treasure), 213, 329 improvising, aids to, 31 improvising answers, 31 improvising Damage table, 30 incorporating new players, 24 individual treasure, 120 infernal hierarchy, 205 inferno hazard, 76 Infinite Staircase, 177 ingested poison, 90 inhaled poison, 90 Initial Attitude table, 116 Initiative, 42 injury poison, 90 Inner Planes, 174 instigating, 21 Instrument of Illusions, 271 Instrument of Scribing, 271 Instrument of the Bards, 272 intra-party conflict, 17 intrigue, 134 Investigation skill, 35 Invoked Devastation, 147, 160, 170 oun Stone, 273 Iron Bands of Bilarro, 274 tron Flask, 274 isle of Dread, 191 luz, 145, 148, 358 jallarzi Sallavarian, 146, 358 Javelin of Lightning, 275 journal, campaign, 7, 127 jou stages, 36 challenges, 39 Journeys without Destinations sidebar, 36 Jovar, 201 Juiblex, 181 Kalakeri, 209 Karasuthra, 186 Kas the Betrayer, 358 keeping combat moving, 47 keeping the adventure moving, 112 Keg Launcher siege equipment, 96 htom's Ointment, 275 Keoland, old, 169 Keraptis, 358 Khalas, 197 Knights of the Watch, 146 Knowing the Rules sidebar, 19 know your players, 21 Krangath, 197 Krigala, 186 Kyuss, 359 Laboratory Bastion facility, 342 Labyrinth Winds, 188 Lady of Pain, 210 Laeral Silverhand, 359 Lamordia, 209 land, parcels of, 81 Land of Black Ice, 147 Lantern of Revealing, 275 large groups, 23 Laser Pistol, 73 Laser Rifle, 73 League of Malevolence, 359 learning by observing, 13 lesser deities, 74 lethality, scaling, 62 letters of recommendation, 80 level advancement without XP, 49 Level-Based Renown table, 92 leveling up, 48 Levistus, 203 Library Bastion facility, 342 Lightning Cannon siege equipment, 96 Limbo, 174, 198 limits, hard and soft, 15 line of sight, 45 linking adventures, 139 Living History sidebar, 160 living quarters, 67 Lock Complexity table, 64 locked doors, 64 Lock of Trickery, 275 Lock Quality table, 64 Lolth, 180 Lolth's Sting poison, 91 long range, tracking position at, 45 Lord Soth, 359 lore glossary, 354 Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth, 164 loyalty, 89 Luck Blade, 275 Lunia, 201 Lute of Thunderous Thumping, 275 Mace of Disruption, 276 Mace of Smiting, 276 Mace of Terror, 276 madness. See mental stress, 70 magical contagions, 61 magic item(s), 216 A-Z, 227 activating a, 218 awarding, 218 casting spells from, 220 charges, 220 crafting, 220 creating or modifying a, 58 cursed, 220 fit, 217 rarity, 217 recharging, 220 resilience, 220 sentient, 226 special features, 222 values by rarity, 217 Magic tem Categories table, 216 Magic Item Crafting Time and Cost table, 221 Magic Item Power by Rarity table, 58 Magic Item Rarities and Values table, 217 Magic Item Rarities table, 218 Magic Item Rules sidebar, 217 Magic Items Awarded by Level table, 218 Magic Item's Creator or Intended User table, 222 Magic Items for Starting Characters sidebar, 220 Magic Item's History table, 222 Magic Item's Minor Property table, 223 Magic Item's Quirk table, 223 Magic Item Tools table, 221 Magic Item Tracker sheet, 219 Magma, Plane of, 207 Major Beneficial Properties table, 224 Major Detrimental Properties table, 225 Maladomini, 203 Malagard, 203 Malbolge, 203 Malice poison, 91 Malsheem, 204 Mammon, 202 Mangonel siege equipment, 97 Mantle of Spell Resistance, 276 Manual of Bodily Health, 277 Manual of Gainful Exercise, 277 Manual of Golems, 277 Manual of Quickness of Action, 278 maps, 365 adventure, 109 chases, 53 dungeon, 33, 66 principles, 66 settlement, 33, 93 symbols, 109 tactical, 44 using, 33 wilderness, 33 marching order, 11 Mariner's Armor, 278 marks of prestige, 80 Material Plane, 198 material realms, 173 Maure Castle, 164 Mechanus, 174, 200 Medallion of Thoughts, 278 medals, 81 Meditation Chamber Bastion facility, 342 memory loss (Feywild), 196 Menagerie Bastion facility, 343 mental stress, 70 Menzoberranzan, 359 Mephistopheles, 204 Mercuria, 201 Mertion, 201 metagame thinking. See character knowledge, 18 Midnight Tears poison, EP) milestones, 49 Minauros, 202 Miner Difficulties adventure, 123 Minethys, 187 miniatures, 7, 44 Minor Beneficial Properties table, 224 Minor Detrimental Properties table, 225 Minsce, 359 Mirror of Life Trapping, 278 Mistral Reach, 188 Mithardir, 183 mithral, 359 Mithral Armor, 279 mixing potions, 216 Mob Results table, 83 mobs, 82 Moloch, 203 monster alignment, 51 monster behavior, 116 Monster Personality table, 117 Monster Relationships table, 117 monsters casting spells, 46 months (Greyhawk), 146 Moonblade, 279 Moon-Touched Sword, 280 Moradin, 359 morale. See fight or flight, 48 Mordenkainen, 146, 359 Mordent, 209 Mount Celestia, 69, 174, 200 Mud Hills, 189 multiple DMs, 25 multiverse, 180 Mungoth, 197 Muspelheim, 210 mutual respect, 15 mystery, 134 Mystery Key, 280 mythic fantasy, 134 myths, 75 name tables, 85 narration, 26 during travel, 39 in combat, 46 natural subterranean areas, 67 Nature's Mantle, 280 navigation, 40 Necklace of Adaptation, 230 Necklace of Fireballs, 280 Necklace of Prayer Beads, 281 Negative Plane, 201 Nessus, 204 Neverwinter, 360 next dawn, 220 Nidavellir, 210 Niflheim, 197 Nine Hells, 174, 201 Nine Lives Stealer, 281 "no, but," 31 Nolzur's Marvelous Pigments, 281 noncombat challenges, XP for, 49 nonplayer characters (NPCs), 84 as party members, 23, 88 portrayals of, 32 recurring, 88 northern Flanaess, 166 note-taking materials, 6 NPC Appearance table, 86 NPC Secrets table, 88 NPC Tracker sheet, 87 Oathbow, 282 objectives, encounter, 112 Observatory Bastion facility, 343 obstacles (in travel), 40 Ocanthus, 182 Oceanus, River, 177 Oerik, 143 Oerth, 143 Oil of Etherealness, 282 Oil of Sharpness, 282 Oil of Slipperiness, 283 Oil of Taggit poison, 91 Oinos, 197 old Keoland, 169 one-hour guideline, 8 Ooze, Plane of, 207 optimizing, 21 Orb of Direction, 283 Orb of Dragonkind, 283 Orb of Time, 284 Orcus, 181 Order of the Hart, 146 orders (Bastion), 336 organization ethos, 51 organizations (Greyhawk), 146 Orthrys, 187 Otiluke, 146, 360 Otto, 146, 360 outcomes, resolving, 27 Outer Planes, 174 alignment and the, 51, 174, 176 layers of the, 176 traveling the, 177 Outer Planes table, 174 Outlands, 174, 205 pace, encounter, 118 Paladine. See Bahamut, 354. Pale Tincture poison, 91 Pandemonium, 69, 174, 206 Pandesmos, 206 pantheon, creating a, 74 Para-elemental Planes, 207 parcels of land, 81 party leader, 23 passing time, 10 passive checks, 28 Passive Perception, 35 Patron Hooks table, 111 patrons, adventure, 110 Pearl of Power, 284 Perception, 35 and encounters, 36 Perfume of Bewitching, 284 Periapt of Health, 284 Periapt of Proof against Poison, 284 Periapt of Wound Closure, 284 personality, 51, 86, 116 Phandalin, 360 Philter of Love, 285 Phlegethon, 206 Phiegethos, 202 Pipe of Smoke Monsters, 285 Pipes of Haunting, 285 Pipes of the Sewers, 285 place to play, 6 Plague-Mort, 206 Plain of Infinite Portals, 180 plan adventures, 139 Planar Adventure Situations table, 179 planar adventuring, 178 planar dissonance, 176 planar effects, 69 planar portals, 176 planar travel, 176 plan encounters, 112 Plane of Ash, 207 Plane of Ice, 207 Plane of Magma, 207 Plane of Ooze, 207 Plane of Shadow. See Shadowfell, 208 planes and alignment, 51, 174, 176 Planescape, 136 planes of existence, 173 Plate Armor of Etherealness, 286 player(s), 6 absent, 24 die rolling, 18 drawing attention, 26 drawing in (to an adventure), 110 engaging (in social interaction), 32 exploiting the rules, 19 favorites, 140 finding, 6 getting invested, 140 incorporating new, 24 input (to a campaign), 129 know your, 21 overly cautious, 18 with multiple characters, 23 play style, 13 Pluton, 197 poison, 90 poisoned darts trap, 101 poisoned needle trap, 102 poisonous gas hazard, 77 Pole of Angling, 286 Pole of Collapsing, 286 Porphatys, 187 Portable Hole, 286 Portcullises table, 64 Positive Plane, 208 possession, demonic, 60 Poster Map sidebar, 143 Potion Miscibility table, 216 Potion of Animal Friendship, 287 Potion of Clairvoyance, 287 Potion of Climbing, 287 Potion of Comprehension, 287 Potion of Diminution, 287 Potion of Fire Breath, 287 Potion of Flying, 287 Potion of Gaseous Form, 287 Potion of Giant Strength, 288 Potion of Greater Invisibility, 288 Potion of Growth, 288 Potion of Healing, 288 Potion of Heroism, 288 Potion of Invisibility, 288 Potion of Invulnerability, 288 Potion of Longevity, 288 Potion of Mind Reading, 288 Potion of Poison, 288 Potion of Pugilism, 289 Potion of Resistance, 289 Potion of Speed, 289 Potion of Vitality, 289 Potion of Water Breathing, 289 Potions magic item category, 216 Pot of Awakening, 289 precipitation, 38, 69 premise, adventure, 105 premise, campaign, 129 prepared defenders, 118 preparing a session, 8 prestige, marks of, 80 Primus, 198, 200 Prince of Frost, 360 Prismeer, 195 problem-solving, 22 proficiency, 27 properties, firearms, 72 Prosthetic Limb, 290 psychic dissonance. See planar dissonance, 176 psychic wind, 185 Psychic Wind Location Effects table, 185 Psychic Wind Psychic Effects table, 185 Pub Bastion facility, 344 Purple Worm Poison, 91 Quaal's Feather Token, 290 Quarterstaff of the Acrobat, 291 quasi-deities, 74 Queen of Air and Darkness, 195, 360 quest rewards, 121 quicksand pit hazard, 77 Quiver of Ehlonna, 291 Radiant Citadel, 193 Rain of Colorless Fire, 147 Ram siege equipment, 97 random encounters, 119 Random Individual Treasure table, 120 random magic item rarity, 218 random magic items tables, 326 Random Treasure Hoard table, 121 Ravenloft, 136 Raven Queen, 361 Ravnica, 136 razorvine hazard, 78 reactive tactics, 117 read-aloud text, 9 recap, 9 recording rules interpretations, 13 recurring elements, 140 recurring NPCs, 88 relationships, monster, WwW relics (treasure), 213, 330 religions, creating, 75 religious practice, 75 Reliquary Bastion facility, 344 Reload property, 72 renown, 92 resolving outcomes, 27 respect, mutual, 15 respect for the DM, 18 respect for the players, 17 rests, 118 Revolver, 73 rewards, adventure, 120 rewards, milestone, 49 rewards, quest, 121 Ribcage, 206 Riftcanyon, 147 rights, special, 81 Rigus, 206 Ring of Animal Influence, 292 Ring of Djinni Summoning, 292 Ring of Elemental Command, 292 Ring of Evasion, 293 Ring of Feather Falling, 293 Ring of Free Action, 293 Ring of Invisibility, 293 Ring of Jumping, 293 Ring oh Mind Shielding, 293 Ring of Protection, 294 Ring of Regeneration, 294 Ring of Resistance, 294 Ring of Shooting Stars, 294 Ring of Spell Storing, 295 Ring of Spell Turning, 295 Ring of Swimming, 295 Ring of Telekinesis, 295 Ring of the Ram, 296 Ring of Three Wishes, 296 Ring of Warmth, 296 Ring of Water Walking, 296 Ring of X-ray Vision, 296 Rings magic item category, 216 Rival Coin, 296 River Oceanus, 177 River Styx, 178 River Styx hazard, 78 roads, 38 Robe of Eyes, 297 Robe of Scintillating Colors, 297 Robe of Stars, 297 Robe of the Archmagi, 298 Robe of Useful Items, 298 Rock of Bral, 361 rockslide hazard, 78 Rod of Absorption, 299 Rod of Alertness, 299 Rod of Lordly Might, 300 Rod of Resurrection, 301 Rod of Rulership, 301 Rod of Security, 301 Rod of the Pact Keeper, 301 Rods magic item category, 216 roleplaying, 32 rolling Initiative, 42 rolling stone trap, 102 rooms, designing dungeon, 66 Rope of Climbing, 301 Rope of Entanglement, 301 Rope of Mending, 302 Ruby of the War Mage, 302 Rudolph van Richten, 361 rulebooks, 6 rule of fun, 12 rules discussions, 18 rules interpretations, recording, 13 running combat, 42 running exploration, 33 running social interaction, 32 running the game, 21 Sacristy Bastion facility, 344 Saddle of the Cavalier, 302 Sample Fear DCs table, 70 Sample Guilds table, 341 Sample Mental Stress Effects table, 70 Sanctuary Bastion facility, 345 Sanctum Bastion facility, 346 saving throws, 29 scaling lethality, 62 Scarab of Protection, 302 Scarlet Order, 146 Scheduling Games sidebar, 6 science fantasy, 135 Scimitar of Speed, 302 Scriptorium Bastion facility, 346 Scroll of Protection, 302 Scroll of Titan Summoning, 303 Scrolls magic item category, 216 Sea of Fire, 189 Sea of Ice, 191 Sea of Light, 191 searches (in travel), 41 Secret Doors table, 64 secrets and discovery, 26 seelie fey. See Summer Court, 195 selling magic items, 217 Semiautomatic Pistol, 73 Sending Stones, 303 sentient magic items, 226 Sentinel Shield, 303 serials, 139 Serpent Venom poison, 91 session, game, 9 ending a, 10 preparing a, 8 session-based advancement, 49 session zero, 137 setting, adventure, 109