# Layers Of The Outer Planes Most Outer Planes include a number of distinct realms. These environments are often imagined as a stack of related parts of the same plane, so travelers refer to them as layers. For example, Mount Celestia resembles a sacred mountain with seven great plateaus along its ascent, the Nine Hells is like a pit where the River Styx plunges down through nine tiers, and the Abyss has a seemingly endless number of layers. Like the planes themselves, the description of layers is highly metaphorical and subject to varying interpretations. The plane of Carceri, for example, has been described as a long series of spherical worlds arranged like beads on a string, with each sphere consisting of six nested spheres---the layers of the plane. This fanciful description is but one attempt to make sense of the distorted geography of a place that isn't even a place in the ordinary sense of the word, but an alternate state of reality. Most portals from elsewhere reach the first layer of a multilayered plane. This layer is depicted as the top or bottom layer, depending on the plane. As the arrival point for most visitors, the first layer functions like an antechamber for that plane. # Alignment And The Outer Planes The Outer Planes are realms of thought and moral- ity more than merely physical reality, and they can affect visitors on a deeply personal level as well as a physical one. At your discretion, a creature that spends a long time on an Outer Plane that is not its home plan can begin to take on aspects of that plane's ethos. Vis- itors to the Upper Planes might feel strange urges to perform deeds of kindness or compassion, while visitors to the Lower Planes might find themselves # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY drawn to acts of cruelty or betrayal. Those who spend time on Mechanus and other lawful planes might feel their ties of loyalty to each other growing stronger, while those who visit Limbo and other chaotic planes might become temporarily more independent or self-absorbed. These tendencies are best handled as DM suggestions and then roleplayed by the players, but you might award Heroic Inspira- tion to characters who bring these characteristics to life in their characters. Planar Dissonance, Celestials who visit the Lower Planes and Fiends who visit the Upper Planes ex- perience significant discomfort if their visits last more than a few hours. After finishing a Long Rest on a plane that is alien to its nature, a Celestial or Fiend makes a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, whenever the creature makes a D20 Test, the creature must subtract 1d4 from the roll. The effect is cumulative with each failed save and ends when the creature finishes a Long Rest on a plane that isn't opposed to its nature. # Planar Travel When adventurers travel to other planes of ex- istence, they undertake a legendary journey in which they might face supernatural guardians and undergo many ordeals. The nature of that journey and the trials along the way depend in part on the means of travel, such as magical portals or spells. # Planar Portals A portal is a stationary, interplanar connection that links a specific location on one plane of existence to a specific location on another. Some portals func- tion like doorways, appearing as a clear window or a fog-shrouded passage, and interplanar travel is as simple as moving through the portal. Other portals are locations---circles of standing stones, soaring towers, sailing ships, or even whole towns---that exist on multiple planes at once or flicker from one plane to another. Some are vortices, joining an Elemental Plane with a very similar location on the Material Plane, such as a swirling pool of magma in the heart of a volcano (leading to the Plane of Fire) or a maelstrom in the depths of the ocean (leading to the Plane of Water). Passing through a planar portal can be the sim- plest way to travel from the Material Plane to a desired location on another plane. Often, though, a portal presents an adventure in itself. First, the adventurers must find a portal that leads where they want to go. Most portals exist in distant locations, and a portal's location often has thematic similarities to the plane it leads to. For example, a portal to Mount Celestia might be located on a mountain peak. Second, portals often have guardians charged with ensuring that certain creatures don't pass through. A portal's guardian is typically a powerful magical creature, such as a djinni, a sphinx, a titan, or an inhabitant of the portal's destination plane. Finally, most portals aren't open all the time, but open only in particular situations or when a certain requirement is met. A portal can have any require- ment, but the following are the most common: Command. The portal functions only if a particular command is given. A command is usually a word that can be invoked in any language (including a signed language). Sometimes the command must be given as a character passes through the portal (which is otherwise a mundane doorway, window, or similar opening). Other portals open when the command is given within 15 feet of themselves, and they remain open for 1d12 minutes. Key Item. The portal functions if the traveler car- ries a particular object; the item acts much like a key to a door. This item can be a common object or a particular one created for that portal. The city of Sigil above the Outlands is known as the City of Doors because it features an overwhelm- ing number of such item-keyed portals. Random. The portal functions for a random period, then shuts down for a similarly random duration. Typically, such a portal allows 1d6 + 6 travelers to pass through, then closes for 1d6 days. Situation. The portal functions only if a particular condition is met. A situation-keyed portal might open on a clear night, when it rains, or when a certain spell is cast in its vicinity. Time. The portal functions only at particular times on the Material Plane: during a full moon, during the spring equinox or winter solstice, or when the stars are in certain positions. Once it opens, such a portal remains open for a limited time, such as for 3 days following the full moon, for 1 hour, or for 10 minutes. Learning and meeting a portal's requirements can draw characters into further adventures as they chase down a key item, scour old libraries for com- mands, or consult sages to find the right time to visit the portal. SPELLS A number of spells allow direct or indirect access to different planes of existence. Gate and Plane Shift can directly transport adventurers to any other plane, with different degrees of precision. Ethereal- ness allows adventurers to enter the Ethereal Plane. And Astral Projection lets adventurers project them- selves into the Astral Plane and from there travel to the Outer Planes. # Traveling The Outer Planes Described in the sections that follow are four planar features that connect multiple Outer Planes: - The Infinite Staircase - The River Oceanus - The River Styx - Yggdrasil, the World Tree Other planar crossings might exist in your cam- paign, or it might be possible to walk (or journey aboard a wondrous train or similar vehicle) from one plane to another in your cosmology. # Infinite Staircase The Infinite Staircase is an extradimensional stair- case that connects the planes. An entrance to the Infinite Staircase usually appears as a nondescript door. Beyond the portal lies a small landing with a stairway leading up and down. The Infinite Stair- case changes appearance as it climbs and descends, going from simple stairs of wood or stone to a chaotic jumble of stairs hanging in radiant space, where no two steps share the same gravitational orientation. It includes ramps, hovering platforms, and clockwork conveyor belts along its endless construction. The adventure anthology Quests from the Infinite Staircase provides more details about this planar pathway. The staircase is home to Nafas, a noble genie cre- ated by the planar winds that blow into the expanse through its myriad doors. A distant and benevolent observer, Nafas hears wishes spoken throughout the multiverse---wishes he fulfills with the help of adventurers who happen upon his aeolian palace. Doors to the Infinite Staircase are often tucked away in dusty, half-forgotten places that no one fre- quents or pays any attention to. On any given plane, multiple doors might lead to the Infinite Staircase, though entrances aren't common knowledge and are occasionally guarded by devas, sphinxes, yugo- loths, and other powerful monsters. # River Oceanus The water of the Oceanus is sweet and fragrant, as befits its headwaters in the Blessed Fields of Elysium. This plane-spanning waterway provides a path through some of the Upper Planes. It flows through each of Elysium's layers, passes through the top layer of the Beastlands, streams across the top layer of Arborea, and finally drains away somewhere in Arborea's second layer. Though it isn't as far-reaching as the Styx, the Oceanus is still a commonly used path between planes and layers. Trading vessels sail up and down its length, and small towns line its banks. Travelers can usually find a boat to hire somewhere along its shores. CHAPTER6\| COSMOLOGY 177 178 eyes ' RIVER Styx The River Styx bubbles with grease, foul flotsam, and the putrid remains of battles along its banks. The ill effects of the Styx are described under "Hazards" in chapter 3. The Styx churns through the top layers of Ache- ron, the Nine Hells, Gehenna, Hades, Carceri, the Abyss, and Pandemonium. Tributaries of the Styx snake through lower layers of these planes. For example, a tendril of the Styx winds through every layer of the Nine Hells, allowing passage from one layer of that plane to the next. Sinister ferries float on the waters of the Styx, crewed by pilots skilled in negotiating the unpre- dictable currents and eddies of the river. For a price, these pilots carry passengers from plane to plane. Some pilots are Fiends, while others are the souls of dead creatures from the Material Plane. # Yggdrasil, The World Tree The World Tree, Yggdrasil, is a cosmic ash tree that spans the Outer Planes and links them to many worlds of the Material Plane. Its roots stretch into the Lower Planes, touching Hades, Pandemonium, and possibly other Lower Planes. Most of its mas- sive trunk rises through the plane of Ysgard, and its branches stretch through the Upper Planes and across the Astral to the Material Plane. Some legends describe a great tree, a seedling of Yggdrasil, that the god Corellon planted and tended on the First World at the dawn of time. When the First World was destroyed, seeds from this tree scattered into the void and took root to form the worlds of the Material Plane. Thus, many philos- ophers and naturalists view all trees or even all plants as descendants of Yggdrasil, part of a vast network of plant life across the multiverse. Planar travelers can climb among the roots and branches of Yggdrasil to travel from plane to plane or world to world. Some creatures position them- selves as expert guides to this vast cosmic network of branching pathways, constantly studying the ever-changing paths as the tree continues its eter- nal growth. # Planar Adventuring In real-world myths, legends, and literature, ventur- ing onto other planes of existence isn't simply a mat- ter of visiting an unusual environment inhabited by strange creatures; it's a journey with meaning expressed through layers of symbol and metaphor. Adventuring on the planes of the D&D cosmology is an opportunity to craft similarly meaningful and profound journeys. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY ome bbc:: g.4 o. \~ 6c: =4 = tt \> HED % Planar adventures ought to be extraordinary. As adventurers reach the medium to high levels of your campaign, they find more cause to venture beyond the confines of the world they call home and explore the planes. If you are ready for the party to undertake a truly mythic quest, such as to find a lost Artifact or an elusive extraplanar entity, the vast multiverse is yours to explore. As their physical and magical abilities are put to the test, the charac- ters might find their emotions, values, and spirits challenged as well. # The Blood War Throughout history, the teeming demon hordes of the Abyss and the regimented legions of devils from the Nine Hells have battled for supremacy in the cosmos. On worlds of the Material Plane, those who know of the conflict refer to it as the Blood War---a conflict that has raged for millennia, ravaging the Lower Planes. The battlefields of the Blood War are concen- trated in the Nine Hells and the Abyss, though fight- ing also takes place on the Material Plane, on the planes between those realms on the Great Wheel, and anywhere else demons and devils congregate. Although the intensity of the conflict waxes and wanes, and the front lines of the war can shift drastically, a moment never goes by when demons and devils aren't battling each other somewhere in the multiverse. Many demons and devils are obsessed with find- ing some advantage for their side in the Blood War, and powerful mortal adventurers are sometimes drawn into tangled schemes to that end. Addition- ally, open conflict between Fiends is a constant threat on most of the Lower Planes, even when it is incidental to the missions that bring characters to those planes. A simple quest to find a treasure lost in Hades becomes much less simple when the trea- sure is located in the midst of a raging battle! Natives of the Upper Planes also have roles to play in the Blood War. While most of them are content to watch evil feed on itself, they still take steps to minimize the threat to the rest of the multiverse, Whenever the Blood War spills into a location out- side the Abyss and the Nine Hells, angels and other emissaries of the gods---including mortals of excep- tional valor---stand ready to intervene. # Planar Adventure Situations You can use the Planar Adventure Situations table instead of the tables in the "Adventure Situations by Level" section in chapter 4 to inspire adventures that draw characters into the planes of existence. These adventure ideas are most appropriate for characters of level 11+. A PORTAL To THE Beasria # The Branches Of a OPENS AMID tHE WorLo Tree es # Planar Adventure Situations 1d10 Situation 1 1d10 When magic fails to revive a dead person, 7 the only solution is to venture to the Outer Planes to find the person's spirit and either release it from some prison or convince the person to return to life. 8 People who venture into the woods keep accidentally wandering into the Feywild or the Shadowfell. They might never return, return with no sense of how much time has passed, or return dramatically changed. 9 A long-dead oracle is the only one who knows how a terrible prophecy might be averted, but the cataclysmic fulfillment of the prophecy has already begun. A god has stopped answering prayers and won't respond to any Commune spell. 10 A devil has tricked an angel into meddling in the Blood War, and the angel seeks mortal aid. A ancestor of one of the characters must be convinced to bless the character before the full power of the character's bloodline can be unleashed. Situation A foolhardy knight carried a holy weapon on a doomed mission into the Nine Hells, and the powers of Mount Celestia want the weapon and the knight's remains retrieved. A titan is imprisoned on an Outer Plane. The characters might be trying to stop those who seek to release it, or they might want to release it to help defend the world from a greater threat. To prove themselves worthy of an even greater quest, the characters are sent to slay a horrible monster, win the favor of a pow- erful planar being, negotiate peace between two warring planar factions, or retrieve a long-lost item on another plane. An item of legend is being sold at auction in Sigil, the City of Brass, or some other planar metropolis. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 179 180 tee: 4 \ # 'tour Of The Multiverse Each plane in the multiverse is described below. The planes are presented in alphabetical order. ABYSS The Abyss embodies all that is perverse, gruesome, and chaotic. Its virtually endless layers spiral down- ward into ever more appalling forms. Each layer of the Abyss boasts a horrific environ- ment that is harsh and inhospitable to mortals. Each layer also reflects the entropic nature of the Abyss. Much of the plane seems to be in a decaying, crumbling, or corroded state, and its corruption affects visitors (see "Curses and Magical Contagions" in chapter 3). # Layers Of The Abyss The layers of the Abyss are numbered based on the sequence of their discovery and cataloging by ex- plorers from Sigil. Thus, the Plain of Infinite Portals is identified as the first layer, Azzagrat encompasses the 45th, 46th, and 47th layers; the Demonweb is the 66th layer; and so on. The Layers of the Abyss table presents several infamous layers; detailed descriptions of these layers follow the table. LAYERS OF THE AByss Layer Description The Plainof On layer 1, corroded iron fortresses Infinite Portals defend routes to lower layers. Azzagrat Graz'zt's corrupt, decadent city is split across layers 45, 46, and 47. The On layer 66, Lolth's web snares all Demonweb and hides portals to other planes. Gaping Maw Layer 88 is a malevolent wilderness surrounding Demogorgon's ocean fortress. Thanatos On layer 113, an endless graveyard hosts Orcus and the sleepless dead. The Slime Pits Layer 222, a fetid realm of ooze (Shedaklah) and fungi, obeys the whims of Juiblex and Zuggtmoy. The Yeenoghu and his gnoll servants Death Dells prowl layer 422---a cruel, desolate realm. The Endless Layer 600's endless labyrinth turns Maze visitors into Baphomet's prey. Layer I: The Plain of Infinite Portals. This layer is the miserable gateway to the infinite layers of the Abyss. Under a glaring red sun, the rocky ground contains gaping craters that are portals to the other # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY AF ee we,. fer.e layers of the Abyss. Other portals lead to Pande- monium, Sigil, the gate-town of Plague-Mort in the Outlands, and the Astral Plane, making this layer the best way to escape the horrors of the Abyss. Iron fortresses dot the landscape, homes to petty lords and upstart demons that are as changeable as the Abyss itself. The portal leading to Plague-Mort is tucked within a fortress called the Broken Reach, ruled by a succubus named Red Shroud. In the Broken Reach, those who can prove their strength and met- tle can stay unharmed for a few days at least. Layers 45-47: Azzagrat. The demon lord Graz'zt embodies manipulation and cruelty, tempting mor- tals with the promise of appalling delights and dec- adent luxuries. He rules over the realm of Azzagrat, which encompasses three interconnected layers of the Abyss. His seat of power is the fantastic Ar- gent Palace in the city of Zelatar, whose bustling markets and pleasure palaces draw visitors from across the multiverse in search of obscure magical lore and perverse delights. By Graz'zt's command, the demons of Azzagrat present a veneer of civility and courtly comity. However, the so-called Triple Realm holds as much danger as any other part of the Abyss, and planar visitors can vanish without a trace in its mazelike cities and in forests whose trees have serpents for branches. Layer 66: The Demonweb. Lolth is the Demon Queen of Spiders, whose schemes entangle entire civilizations on worlds across the multiverse. Of all demon lords, she might have the most active inter- est in the worlds of the Material Plane and in the cultists who do her bidding on those worlds, but her interest lies only in domination. Lolth's layer is an immense network of thick, mag- ical webbing that forms passageways and cocoon- like chambers. Structures, ships, and other objects are caught in the webbing. The webs conceal ran- dom portals that snare objects from demiplanes and Material Plane worlds that figure into the schemes of the Spider Queen. Lolth's servants also build dungeons amid the webbing, trapping and hunting Lolth's hated enemies within crisscrossing corridors of web-mortared stone. Far beneath these dungeons lie the bottomless Demonweb Pits where the Spider Queen dwells with her most loyal servants---yochlol demons created to serve her that outrank mightier demons while in the Spider Queen's realm. Layer 88: The Gaping Maw. The Sibilant Beast and the self-styled Prince of Demons, Demogorgon yearns for nothing less than undoing the order of the multiverse. A two-headed monster who seems as much in conflict with himself as with other be- ings, the Prince of Demons inspires fear and hatred among other demons and demon lords. Demogorgon's layer is a vast wilderness of bru- tality and horror known as the Gaping Maw, where even powerful demons are overcome by fear. Reflecting Demogorgon's dual nature, the Gaping Maw consists of a massive primeval continent cov- ered in dense jungle, surrounded by a seemingly endless expanse of ocean and brine flats. The Prince of Demons rules his layer from two serpentine tow- ers, which emerge from a turbid sea. Each tower is topped with an enormous fanged skull. The spires constitute the fortress of Abysm, where echoes of Demogorgon's turbulent thoughts resound through the halls, tearing at the minds of creatures who dare to enter. Layer 113: Thanatos. Known as the Demon Prince of Undeath and the Blood Lord, the demon lord Or- cus is worshiped by Undead and by living creatures that channel the power of undeath. A brooding and nihilistic entity, Orcus yearns to make the multi- verse a place of death and despair, forever unchang- ing except by his will, and to turn all creatures into Undead under his control. Orcus's realm of Thanatos is a land of bleak mountains, barren moors, ruined cities, and forests of twisted black trees under a black sky. Tombs, ys # The Detritus Of The Planes Is TANGLED IN THE Demonwes Pits mausoleums, gravestones, and sarcophagi litter the landscape. Undead swarm across the plane, bursting from their tombs and graves to tear apart any crea- tures foolish enough to journey here. Orcus rules Thanatos from a vast palace known as Everlost, crafted of obsidian and bone. Set ina howling wasteland called Oblivion's End, the palace is surrounded by tombs and graves dug into the sheer slopes of narrow valleys, creating a tiered necropolis. Layer 222: The Slime Pits. Also known as Shedaklah, this layer is ruled by two separate yet equally repugnant demon lords---Juiblex and Zuggtmoy---who coexist with little conflict. Juiblex, the Demon Lord of Slimes and Oozes, is an amorphous mass that lurks in the abyssal depths. The wretched Faceless Lord cares nothing for cultists or mortal servants, and its sole desire is to turn all creatures into formless copies of its horrid self. Zuggtmoy is the Demon Queen of Fungi and the Lady of Rot and Decay. Her primary desire is to infect the living with spores, transforming them into her servants and, eventually, into decomposing hosts for the mushrooms, molds, and other fungi that she spawns. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 182 As the name suggests, the Slime Pits is a bubbling morass of fetid sludge. The landscape is covered in vast expanses of caustic slimes, and strange organic forms rise from the oceans of ooze at Juiblex's command. Zuggtmoy's palace consists of two dozen immense mushrooms, among the largest in exis- tence, hollowed into grand chambers and twisting corridors. The palace is surrounded by a field of acidic puffballs and poisonous vapors. Layer 422: The Death Dells. The demon lord Yeeno- ghu hungers for slaughter and senseless destruction. Gnolls are his instruments on the Material Plane, and he drives them to ever-greater atrocities in his name. Delighting in sorrow and hopelessness, the Gnoll Lord yearns to turn the cosmos into a waste- land in which the last surviving gnolls tear one an- other apart for the right to feast upon the dead. Yeenoghu rules a layer of ravines and badlands known as the Death Dells. Here, creatures must hunt to survive. Even plants try to snare the unwary to bathe their roots in blood. Yeenoghu's servants, helping to sate their master's hunger as he prowls his kingdom, capture creatures from the Material Plane for release in the Gnoll Lord's realm. Layer 600: The Endless Maze. The demon lord Baphomet, also known as the Horned King and the Prince of Beasts, embodies bestial bloodlust. If he had his way, civilization would crumble and all mor- tals would embrace their predatory instincts. Baphomet's layer is a never-ending dungeon with the Horned King's enormous palace at its center. A confusing jumble of crooked hallways and myriad chambers, the palace is surrounded by a mile-wide moat concealing a confounding series of submerged stairs and tunnels leading deeper into the fortress. ABYss ADVENTURES The Abyss embodies the loathsome corruption of chaos and evil. A descent into the Abyss is a journey into a hostile and uncharted environment. It's also an opportunity to confront the evil in one's own heart and to resist the temptation to turn against allies in order to survive. Heroic characters might make a desperate last stand against endless hordes of demons here, or they might try to avoid detection while seeking a holy relic left behind by some lost hero who dared to venture here. It's the nature of the Abyss to contaminate the other planes it touches. Opening a portal to the Abyss from any other plane allows the Abyss to cre- ate tiny pockets of Abyssal evil that can eventually become so corrupted that they're drawn into the Abyss. Thus, adventurers exploring a desecrated temple or fetid swamp on the Material Plane can unexpectedly find themselves in a demon-infested environment very much like the Abyss without ever leaving their home plane. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY oe! 7 ad ACHERON Acheron is made of immense iron blocks whose metallic surfaces ring beneath the marching feet of endless armies. These blocks drift through an airy void, sometimes colliding with a fearsome clang, crushing all between them and sending shudders through the plane. Acheron has four layers, with the largest blocks gravitating to the top layer. Some scholars have the- orized that the crashing blocks of the upper layers are eventually broken down into smaller chunks of matter that sink to the lower layers. The truth is actually the opposite: the tiny shards of Ocanthus, the lowest layer, break off from an icy mire in its deepest recesses and are gradually assembled and organized, perhaps under the influence of nearby Mechanus, into the perfect cubes of Avalas. The nature of Acheron instills bloodlust in those who visit the plane (see "Environmental Effects" in chapter 3). # Layers Of Acheron Layer Description Avalas Spirit soldiers wage endless wars across debris-strewn battlefields. Thuldanin ---\_ Pitted, hollow cubes are filled with the cast-off machinery of war. Tintibulus Jagged blocks tumble in darkness, holding frozen memories sapped by the River Styx and crystallized into fleeting images. Ocanthus = Maelstroms of razor-sharp debris swirl above a mire of black ice. # Acheron Adventures Acheron is a plane of enforced order, where rigid conformity leads to crushed spirits and broken hopes. The spirits here can't conceive of anyone refusing to obey the will of their commanders. They are dedicated soldiers, forever lacking a cause. A journey into Acheron is a confrontation with the bleak nihilism of unending conflict, the harsh reality of authoritarian rule, and the uncaring pres- sures of social conformity. It's also an opportunity for characters to grapple with the question of what they are fighting for, among armies that have for- gotten how to even ask the question. On a more literal level, an adventure in Acheron can involve preventing a villain from scavenging Thuldanin for some new horror of warfare to be unleashed on the battlefield. Or it might require retrieving a secret from the imprisoned thoughts or memories found in the blocks of Tintibulus. ARBOREA ARCADIA Arborea is a plane of extremes: stupendously craggy mountains; unbelievably deep gorges; forests of monstrously huge trees; and vast stretches of wheat fields, orchards, and arbors. Wild-hearted nature spirits dwell in every glade and stream, brooking no infringement. Travelers must tread lightly. The air of Arborea seems charged with excite- ment. Sudden squalls brew up out of nowhere, beating the tree-lined paths with heavy winds. The storms pass within minutes and leave behind warm arcs of sunlight filtering through the forest canopy. Music always seems to be playing in the distance; sometimes it originates from groups of elf musi- cians, but just as often the faint tune is merely the wind curling through the boles of the great trees. # Layers Of Arborea Layer Description Arvandor \_ Towering trees, colorful wildflowers, abundant grain, and delicious fruit create a lush environment. Aquallor An eternal ocean fed by the River Oceanus is home to teeming sea life and mighty storms. Mithardir \| A desert of white sand is abandoned by whatever powers once lived there. # Arborea Adventures Arborea is a larger-than-life place of violent moods and deep affections, of whim backed by steel, and of passions that blaze brightly until they burn out. Its good-natured inhabitants are dedicated to fighting evil, but their reckless emotions sometimes break free with devastating consequences. Rage is as com- mon and as honored as joy in Arborea. An adventure in Arborea can be an opportunity for characters to discover who they are when masks fall away and the honesty of unfettered emotion is revealed. The inhabitants of the plane are accus- tomed to this emotional honesty. Lifelong friends might share a laugh over food and wine, cross blades over a mutual lover, and write songs cele- brating each other's courage and integrity, all ina single evening. For those who aren't accustomed to this candor, though, it can lead to hurt feelings and lingering resentment. Creatures that visit Arborea and then leave some- times experience a desperate desire to return---a yearning so intense that it can interfere with day- to-day life. What secrets lie buried in the sands of Mithardir? An expedition might involve investigating whatever gods or Celestials once inhabited the silver desert or find some knowledge they possessed. Arcadia thrives with orchards of perfectly lined trees, ruler-straight streams, orderly fields, im- maculate roads, and cities laid out in geometrically pleasing shapes. The mountains bear no trace of erosion. Night and day are determined by an orb that floats in the sky above both of Arcadia's layers. Half of the orb radiates sunlight and brings about the day; the other half sheds moonlight and brings on the starry night. The orb rotates evenly without fail, spreading day and night across the entire plane. The weather in Arcadia is governed by four allied demigods called the Storm Kings: the Cloud King, the Wind Queen, the Lightning King, and the Rain Queen. Each one lives in a castle surrounded by the type of weather that ruler controls. Arcadia is suffused with a vigorous life en- ergy that bestows great vitality on visitors (see "Environmental Effects" in chapter 3). # Layers Of Arcadia Layer Description Abellio Everything in these fields of plenty is dedicated to the good of all. Buxenus Military forces gather their strength, amid pleasant valleys and orchards, to reclaim the lost layer of Menausus--- now part of Mechanus. # Arcadia Adventures Everything on Arcadia works toward the common good and a flawless existence. Here, purity is eter- nal, and nothing intrudes on harmony. Individuality is subsumed to peaceful life in community, and military might can be brought to bear on those who disrupt that peace. An adventure in Arcadia can be an opportunity to explore the tension between individual freedom and societal re- sponsibility for the common good. Even law- fully inclined adventurers rarely conform neatly to social expectations, and a visit to this plane can highlight that conflict. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 184. # Astral Plane The Astral Plane is a realm of thought and dream, where visitors travel as disembodied souls to reach the Outer Planes. It is a great silvery sea, the same above and below, with swirling wisps of white and gray streaking among motes of light---the distant stars of far-flung Wildspace systems. Most of the Astral Sea is a vast, empty expanse. Visitors occa- sionally stumble upon the petrified corpse of a dead god or other chunks of rock drifting forever in the silvery void. Much more commonplace are color pools---magical pools of colored light that flicker like radiant, spinning coins. Creatures on the Astral Plane don't age or suffer from hunger or thirst. For this reason, creatures that live on the Astral Plane (such as githyanki) es- tablish outposts on other planes, often the Material Plane, so their children can grow to maturity. # Navigating The Astral Plane A traveler in the Astral Plane can move by sim- ply thinking about moving, but distance has little meaning. In combat, though, a creature has a Fly Speed (in feet) equal to 5 times its Intelligence score and can hover. Just as movement is accomplished by the power of thought, all that is required to find one's destina- tion is to think about it. As long as the destination is somewhere in the Astral Plane (or in Wildspace, as described below)---such as "the nearest githyanki outpost," "the nearest color pool leading to the Abyss," or "the Wildspace system of Realmspace"--- thinking about a place makes the creature aware of the most direct route to that location. The creature doesn't know how long the journey will take or how perilous it will be, just which direction to go in. The DM decides how long it takes to get to a desired destination. A trek to a specific location---a particular Wildspace system or Astral outpost, for example---might take 4d6 days. For a more general location, such as a color pool leading to a specified plane, the journey might take 1d4 « 10 hours. DEAD Gops The Astral Plane is where the petrified remains of dead gods end up---gods who were slain by more powerful entities or who lost all their mortal wor- shipers and perished as a result. A dead god looks like a gigantic, nondescript stone statue that bears little resemblance to the divine entity it once was. Githyanki, mind flayers, and other residents of the Astral Plane sometimes turn these drifting hulks into outposts and cities, many of which are hol- lowed out beneath the surface. The githyanki city of Tu'narath is perhaps the most infamous such place. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY COLor Poo.s Gateways leading from the Astral Plane to other planes appear as two-dimensional pools of rip- pling colors, 1d6 « 10 feet in diameter. ("Color," as with everything in the Astral Plane, is a matter of metaphor; since these portals are perceived by the Astral self and not by physical eyes, their colors are understood rather than seen.) Traveling to another plane requires locating a color pool that leads to the desired plane. These gateways can be identified by color, as shown on the Astral Color Pools table. AsTRAL COLOR PooLs 1420 Plane Pool Color 1 Abyss Amethyst 2 Acheron Flame red 3 Arborea Sapphire blue 4 Arcadia Saffron 5 Beastlands Emerald green 6 Bytopia Amber 7 Carceri Olive 8 Elysium Orange 9 Ethereal Plane Spiraling white 10 Gehenna Russet 11 Hades Rust 12. Limbo Jet black 13-14 Material Plane Silver 15. Mechanus Diamond blue 16 Mount Celestia Gold 17\_\_\_---Nine Hells Ruby 18 Outlands Leather brown 19 Pandemonium Magenta 20 = -Ysgard Indigo WILDSPACE Bobbing in the Astral Plane like corks in an ocean are vast, airless expanses called Wildspace systems. In these systems, the Astral Plane overlaps with the Material Plane, and the stars and planets of the Material Plane are accessible from the Astral Plane. Every world of the Material Plane is situated in a Wildspace system, As an Astral traveler approaches a Wildspace system, the silver fog of the Astral Plane gradually thins until it falls away in Wildspace. Then the sun of the Wildspace system comes into view---often millions of miles away---along with colorful gas clouds, planets, moons, and other cosmic bodies. A Wildspace system teems with space-dwelling life-forms, including spores, plankton, and larger creatures that resemble fish and aquatic mammals. Creatures and objects in Wildspace age normally # A Spelljamming Wasp Ship Approaches # The Gitmyanki City Of Tu'narathnee att \_ PsycHic WIND LOCATION EFFECTS and exist on both the Astral Plane and Material Plane simultaneously. This overlap enables crea- tures to use spells such as Teleport to travel from Wildspace to a nearby world, or vice versa. A crea- ture or ship traveling from one Wildspace system to another must cross the Astral Plane unless it has some other magical means of traveling from one world to another. (See "Material Plane" in this chap- ter.) Spelljammer: Adventures in Space contains exten- sive information about Wildspace and Astral travel. PsycHiIc WIND A psychic wind is a storm of thought that batters travelers' minds rather than their bodies. The storm is made of lost memories, forgotten ideas, and sub- conscious fears that went astray in the Astral Plane and conglomerated into this powerful force. A psychic wind is first sensed as a rapid darkening of the silver-gray sky. After 1d4 minutes, the area becomes as dark as a moonless night. As the sky darkens, the traveler feels buffeting and shaking, as if the plane were rebelling against the storm. As quickly as it comes, the psychic wind passes, and the sky returns to normal in 1 minute. A group of travelers journeying together is sub- jected to one location effect, determined by consult- ing the Psychic Wind Locations Effects table. 1d20 1-8 9-12 13-16 Location Effect Diverted; add 1d6 days to travel time Blown astray; add 3d10 days to travel time Lost; at the end of the travel time, the char- acters arrive at a location other than the intended destination 17-20 Sent through a random color pool (roll on the Astral Color Pools table) Each traveler caught in a psychic wind makes a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw. On a failed save, the traveler suffers a random effect from the Psychic Wind Psychic Effects table as well. PsycHic WIND Psycuic EFFEcTs 1420 Psychic Effect 1-8 You have the Stunned condition for 1 min- ute; you repeat the saving throw at the end of each of your turns, ending the effect on yourself on a success. 9-12 You take 11 (2d10) Psychic damage. 13-17 You take 22 (4d10) Psychic damage. 18-20 You have the Unconscious condition for 5 (1d10) hours; the effect on you ends if you take damage or if another creature takes an action to shake you awake. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY # 185 Astral Plane Adventures Characters most often visit the Astral Plane as a way of getting somewhere else---either to one of the Outer Planes or to different worlds of the Material Plane via Wildspace. En route, they might encounter fellow travelers, such as Celestials, Fiends, slaadi, modrons, or githyanki. Asa realm of thought, memory, and dream, the Astral Plane can also be an adventure destination. Characters might try to plumb the crystallized thoughts of dead gods or sift information from the torrent of a psychic wind. Or they could face Astral manifestations of their own memories, fears, and dreams. BEASTLANDS The Beastlands is a plane of nature unbound, of forests ranging from moss-hung mangroves to snow-laden pines, of thick jungles where the branches are woven so tight that no light pene- trates, of vast plains where grains and wildflow- ers wave in the wind with vibrant life. The plane embodies nature's wildness and beauty, but it also speaks to the animal within all living creatures---not necessarily in a fierce, predatory way but with re- spect to their physical substance and fundamental needs. The spirits of the dead on the Beastlands typ- ically take animal forms or part-animal forms (such as centaurs). Among the greatest inhabitants of this plane are the primal spirits called animal lords. Whenever a visitor slays a Beast native to the plane, the slayer must succeed on a DC 10 Charisma saving throw or shape-shift into the type of Beast that was slain. The creature's game statistics are replaced by the Beast's stat block, but the creature retains its alignment, personality, creature type, Intelligence score, and ability to speak. At the end of each Long Rest, the shape-shifted creature repeats the save. On a successful save, the creature returns to its true form. After three failed saves, the trans- formation can be undone only by a Remove Curse spell or similar magic. LAYERS OF THE BEASTLANDS Layer Description Krigala The River Oceanus is a strong torrent flowing through this wilderness of eternal summer noon. Brux A red sun hovers forever on the hori- zon as mists and streams roil through the trees in eternal twilight. Karasuthra A pale moon provides the only light in this wilderness of eternal night.