# Episodes And Serials There are two basic ways to think about how adventures fit together in your campaign: as distinct episodes or as a serialized story. If you're not sure which type of campaign to run, ask your players what they prefer. If your players have different pref- erences, you can intersperse episodic, stand-alone adventures among serialized adventures to break up the bigger story. EPISODES An episodic campaign is a campaign in which the component adventures don't combine to form an overarching story. Episodic adventures are stand- alone quests, and the villains who appear in one adventure rarely resurface to trouble the characters again. If your game group plays infrequently, an ep- isodic campaign might be ideal because the players can enjoy the current adventure even if they've for- gotten the details of earlier adventures. Starting a New Episode. In an episodic campaign, the start of a new adventure doesn't necessarily have any connection to the end of the last one. The action might pick up immediately after the end of the previous adventure, but it might instead begin weeks, months, or years after the last adventure, allowing interim events to unfold while the charac- ters take a break from adventuring. SERIALS A serialized campaign is one continuous story bro- ken up into smaller parts that flow naturally from one to the next. It often has one or more overarch- ing threats, and the outcome of one adventure can affect how the rest of the campaign unfolds. If your game group meets regularly and often, a serialized campaign allows you to keep your players guessing what will come next as the campaign builds toward a satisfying conclusion. Linking Adventures. In a serialized campaign, make connections between the end of one adven- ture and the start of the next to help it feel like a connected story. Sometimes you can simply con- tinue the current storyline with new locations to explore and new threats to overcome. Alternatively, you can use the Adventure Connections table to inspire a link from one adventure to the next. The table suggests things you can do near the end of one adventure to lead characters into the next one. # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS 139 ADVENTURE CONNECTIONS 1d6 Adventure Connection 7 Introduce a person, an object, or informa- tion that the characters need to transport safely to a location involved in the new adventure. 2 Have a major villain flee to a location that features in the new adventure. The charac- ters might be able to pursue the villain, or they might have to search for clues about where the villain has gone. 3 \_ Introduce clues suggesting that a villain or another NPC in this adventure is part of a larger group---a group that features prominently in the new adventure. 4 Introduce a villainous group that's featured in the new adventure by having its agents spy on or interfere with the characters' activities. 5 Have travelers bring news of events trans- piring elsewhere, leading characters toward the new adventure. 6 ---\_ Give the characters a treasure that's wrapped in mystery they'll need to unravel in the new adventure. # Getting Players Invested To get your players excited about and invested in your campaign, create a setting that features people and places they recognize and where their charac- ters' choices matter. The following sections suggest ways to help you create a world your players will be excited to explore. RECURRING ELEMENTS When characters form relationships---friendships, business arrangements, or even lasting antago- nism---with the people and places of your setting, those people and places stick in the players' minds. Introduce opportunities to forge these lasting relationships early and often. Consider featuring recurring elements such as these in your game: Community. Introduce a small group or commu- nity the characters can think of as their people, like a village, neighborhood, guild, or crew. Home Base. Give the characters a place to call home, such as a tavern, a hideout, or a ship. Bas- tions, as presented in chapter 8, are ideal home bases for characters. Prominent Friend. Create a supportive NPC whom the characters can trust and turn to when they # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS need help, such as a local leader, an innkeeper, a patron, a retired adventurer, or a family member. Friendly Resources. Provide experts or institutions that can assist the characters, like a temple that can provide healing or a learned sage who can help solve mysteries. Likable Villain. Craft a villain who has at least one likable or redeeming quality the characters can appreciate---ideally a villain who isn't preoccupied with killing or harming the characters. As your campaign continues, introduce new people and locations, and bring back favorites from earlier in the campaign for the occasional cameo. # Player Favorites It's often easier to describe people and places that are hostile or frightening than it is to detail a fea- ture you want characters to love. How can you know what rustic scene will make a character associate a place with home or what personality quirk will remind a character of their favorite mentor? You can ask a character's player directly, but instead consider handing over your narrative reins and let- ting a player describe the perfect detail. For example, say you have a peaceful village you plan to feature across several adventures. You hope the characters will connect with the place and treat it as home. As the characters enter the community, they smell something amazing. At this point, you could describe something you think smells good or something you think a character would like. Or you can ask a player, "The smell of something amazing drifts from around the corner. What is it?" What- ever the player's answer---cinnamon rolls from a nearby baker, firework charges being prepared for a celebration, or anything else---becomes part of the village, and the player has added an important detail to the location. You can use player input whenever you want to pinpoint something meaningful to the characters and their players. Consider asking players questions like these whenever you want to describe something in an impactful way: - The tavern owner brings out your favorite dish--- cooked to perfection. What's the dish, and what makes this one remarkable? - The curio shop is selling a trinket that reminds you of one of your family members. What's the trinket, and who does it remind you of? - The local children are playing a game you played in your hometown. What is it? - The young pickpocket reminds you of someone you once knew. Who? - From the animate mass of murderous dolls scram- bles a figure that reminds you of your favorite childhood toy. What is it? += ---\_ = '.S) ee nt | InN THE DRAGONLANCE SETTING, TANIS AND LIRA CALL THEIR LOCAL INN HOME: A PLACE 7TO SEE FAMILIAR FACES LIK€ FIZTBAN THE FasuLous: Questions such as these don't need to draw on warm memories. Having players describe what un- settles or disgusts their characters can make menac- ing encounters more impactful as well. In any case, take note of interesting character details that your players share, and record them in your campaign journal, as these details might be useful inspiration for later adventures. ACKNOWLEDGE THE INCREDIBLE Adventurers are, by their nature, remarkable. Even at level 1, they perform miraculous deeds and pos- sess qualities that set them apart from common folk. Reinforce this in your game. NPCs don't need to gush over the characters, but the characters' reputations as heroes, problem-solvers, or wonder- workers should be cemented early and develop throughout a campaign. During every session, look for opportunities to make the characters feel like the stars of the story, and try to answer one or more of the following questions: - How are the characters the perfect people to solve a problem? - How are the characters' talents highlighted during the adventure? # - ---a= i =; - What stories do NPCs know of the characters' past exploits? - How might an NPC comment on a character's abilities or recognize that they're special? # Break Episodes It's easy to get caught up in a story with dramatic stakes, pitting characters against mounting threats. But every so often, at least once every three to five levels, give the characters a break---a low-stakes session or adventure that has nothing to do with the overarching plot or broader perils. A break episode can be an opportunity for the characters to reflect on the events of the ongoing campaign, explore the nuances of the world, and further develop the relationships between them in a more relaxed setting. Give the group space to breathe, note developments you want to highlight later, then continue with your adventures. Consider these ideas for a break episode. Bastions Episode. The characters take a break from adventuring to tend to their Bastions (see chapter 8), with players taking one or more Bastion turns and describing what happens. Carnival Episode. A carnival tempts the characters with magical attractions, games, and prizes. The # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS I4!I 142 Witchlight Carnival, described in The Wild Beyond the Witchlight, is one such carnival. Creature Comedy. The characters encounter mon- sters with a comedic flavor---such as flumphs, pixies, faerie dragons, or chatty mimics---in a situation that leads to mischief and humor rather than combat. Missing Pet Episode. Someone's pet is missing. The characters must search a settlement and connect with locals to help find it. Shopping Episode. A friendly NPC asks the char- acters to help shop for someone's birthday. Special Event Episode. The characters are invited to a sporting event, holiday celebration, fancy dinner, or ball. Vacation Getaway. The characters relax on a quiet beach, enjoy the comforts of a grateful noble's villa, withdraw to a serene monastery, or while away the hours in a fairy hot spring. # Time In The Campaign Most conflicts ina D&D campaign take weeks or months of in-world time to resolve. A typical cam- paign concludes within a year of in-world time unless you allow the characters to enjoy lengthy periods of quiet time between adventures. If you don't want to track the passage of days, weeks, and months, you might instead track the passage of time using seasons and seasonal festivals. The answer to the question "When does this adven- ture take place?" can be as simple as "in the winter" or "during the fall harvest festival." # Timed Events Extraordinary events coinciding with certain times of year make for great adventure opportunities. Perhaps a ghostly castle appears on a certain hill on the winter solstice every year, or every thirteenth full moon is blood red and fills werewolves with a particularly strong bloodlust. The appearance of a comet in the sky might portend all manner of signif- icant events. The festivals of the gods can serve as opportunities to launch adventures, especially if the gods themselves are involved. # Ending A Campaign A campaign's ending should conclude the last of the major conflicts and tie up most of the threads of its beginning and middle. (It's OK to leave some loose ends for characters to explore in the next cam- paign.) You don't have to take a campaign all the way to level 20 for it to be satisfying; wrap up the campaign whenever the story reaches its natural conclusion. Allow time near the end of your campaign for the characters to finish up any personal goals. Their # CHAPTER \| CREATING CAMPAIGNS stories need to end in a satisfying way, just as the campaign story does. Ideally, some of the charac- ters' individual goals will be fulfilled by the final adventure. Give characters with unfinished goals a chance to finish them before the very end. Once your campaign has ended, a new one can begin. If you intend to run a new campaign for the same group of players in the same setting, using their previous characters' actions as the basis for legends is one way to invest your players in the new campaign. Let the new characters experience how the world has changed because of the actions or accomplishments of the previous campaign's charac- ters. In the end, though, the new campaign is a new story with new protagonists. They shouldn't have to share the spotlight with the heroes of days gone by. # Ending Sooner Than Expected Sometimes you run out of ideas for your campaign, or it gets so sidetracked that you have no idea how to bring it to a satisfying conclusion. You might just not feel excited about it anymore, or you might be so excited with ideas for a new campaign that you can't focus on the current one. Any of these might signal the end of your campaign. The best way forward when you want to enda campaign is to talk to your players about it. If you're not excited about the game anymore, it's quite pos- sible they're not either, and you can change or end the campaign to everyone's satisfaction. Consider the following possibilities: Player Input. If you're running out of ideas for your campaign, your players might be more than happy to supply you with some. Find out what they'd like to have happen if the campaign continues. They might give you all the inspiration you need! Switch DMs. One of your players might have so many ideas about the future of the campaign that they're willing to take over as the DM. You can either take over that player's character or make a new one of your own. Let go of your plans for where the story was going, and allow the new DM to have creative control. Transport the Characters. If you or another DM wants to start up a campaign in a new setting but the players don't want to make new characters, consider having the characters travel through a portal to a new world. Arrange a Grand Finale. Sometimes an end to the campaign is the right answer. Look for ways to end the campaign with a bang, even if it's earlier than you originally planned. Flip through your campaign journal to see if there are forgotten ele- ments you can resurface for one last hurrah. | REYHAWK IS A D&D SETTING YOU CAN ) use as the backdrop for your campaign / or as a model you can reference while creating your own setting. Important as- pects of Greyhawk are described herein so that you can make it your own, expanding or altering it however you wish. Greyhawk is the invention of Gary Gygax, one of the D&D game's original creators. Gary based many of D&D's earliest adventures in this home-brewed setting. The version of Greyhawk presented here is largely based on The World of Greyhawk gazetteer, published in 1980. # Important Names A handful of important names are defined below: Oerth (pronounced orth or oyth) is the world of Greyhawk, It has four continents, four oceans, and a plethora of islands and seas. Oerik (pronounced or-ick or oy-rick) is one of Oerth's continents. Eastern Oerik, the vast region explored in this chapter, is home to many powerful nations and some of the D&D game's most famous dungeons and adventurers. The Flanaess (pronounced flah-nay-ess or flay-nayz) is another name for Eastern Oerik and means "land of the Flan." The region's first human settlers and their descendants are known as the Flan. Greyhawk is an independent city in Eastern Oerik that attracts large numbers of adventurers. Greyhawk doubles as the name of the campaign setting. Poster Map. included with this rulebook is a poster map show- ing the lands of Eastern Oerik on one side (each hex on the map is equivalent to 30 miles) and the Free City of Greyhawk on the other. These loca- tions are described in the "Free City of Greyhawk" and "Greyhawk Gazetteer" sections later in this chapter. # Greyhawk's Premise The year is 576 CY (Common Year). Evil is ascen- dant across the lands of Eastern Oerik. If something isn't done to curtail the growing threat, Eastern Oerik will fall to tyrants, evil dragons, and mon- strous hordes. Heroes are needed to bring hope to the people of the Flanaess. Even if the heroes die trying, the legends of their exploits will live on! Adventuring parties from the Free City of Grey- hawk and other settlements trek across the vast wilderness of Eastern Oerik, slaying monsters and exploring dungeons to find magic items the adven- turers can use to defend their homeland and take the fight to their enemies. # Greyhawk Conflicts Although Greyhawk lends itself well to any D&D adventure you might want to run, the default set- ting features conflicts with three major villainous groups: chromatic dragons, Elemental Evil cults, and luz and his followers. You can replace one or more of these conflicts with ones of your devising or with ones from the "Flavors of Fantasy" section earlier in this chapter. If you use these conflicts, look for opportunities in your adventures to introduce creatures in service to the three villainous groups. Give goals to these villains that bring their operatives into conflict with the player characters. The three major conflicts and the goals of the villainous groups are described below. # Chromatic Dragons Evil chromatic dragons dwell in the wilds of East- ern Oerik. For years, adventurers have kept these evil dragons at bay, sometimes with the help of benevolent metallic dragons. Lately, the chromatic dragons have grown restless, their dreams invaded by the whispers of Tiamat, who is trapped in the Nine Hells. The five-headed queen of dragons be- lieves her escape is nigh, and from the depths of her prison, she commands her kin to go forth and claim the world of Oerth for themselves. Only the greatest among them will live to become her consorts. # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK 143 Goals of Chromatic Dragons. Fortify their lairs to safeguard their treasure hoards; strike out across Eastern Oerik, raiding poorly defended settlements and stealing cattle; demand tribute in the form of food or treasure; and destroy territorial rivals (dra- conic or otherwise). A Chromatic Dragon Arc. The conflict between adventurers and chromatic dragons might follow this broad outline: Levels 1-4. Consider introducing this conflict as the adventurers reach level 3 or 4, with the ad- venturers confronting an aggressive chromatic dragon wyrmling. (You can use the adventure "The Winged God" from chapter 4.) Levels 5-10. The adventurers might face a handful of ambitious young chromatic dragons, without hinting at a more significant conflict. Levels 11-16. It eventually becomes clear that the behavior of the adult dragons the characters face isn't normal. The characters might get involved in one dragon's schemes to undermine or overthrow another, or the characters might hear whispers of the dragons' dream of liberating Tiamat. Levels 17-20. The conflict reaches its world- shattering conclusion, with ancient dragons threatening nations and clashing with each other in devastating battles. The campaign might end with Tiamat herself appearing in the Flanaessperhaps emerging from the Riftcanyon (see "Mys- teries of Greyhawk" in this chapter) or from the depths of the Nyr Dyv. ELEMENTAL EvIL "Elemental Evil" is the name given to a host of de- structive, extraplanar entities---demon lords, evil elemental princes, and elder gods---who ravaged the world of Oerth long ago. Many of these entities are now trapped in dungeons, with cults and monsters seeking to free and serve them. Adventurers are the only ones equipped to keep these malign entities from escaping their subterranean prisons. Goals of Elemental Evil. Search for a demon lord, an elemental prince, or an elder god trapped in a dungeon; build a stronghold above or near the dun- geon; drive other inhabitants out of the region; and use a special magic item or ritual to free whatever is trapped in the dungeon. An Elemental Evil Arc. Two published adventures have explored campaign arcs centered around Ele- mental Evil. The Temple of Elemental Evil (published in 1985) is set in the world of Greyhawk, in the Kron Hills between Verbobonc and Celene. It be- gins in the unremarkable village of Hommlet, with characters slowly discovering that agents of Ele- mental Evil have taken up residence in the nearby ruins and are working to rebuild their great temple. The rest of the adventure focuses on exploring the ruined Temple of Elemental Evil and dealing with the varied evil factions and forces within (including agents of luz, described below). # Tiamat Herself Brings A c C.OSe\_ CAMPAIGN TO A DRAMS Princes of the Apocalypse, inspired by The Temple of Elemental Evil, presents an alternative arc for an Ele- mental Evil-themed campaign: Levels 1-4. The characters discover the villainous activity of four elemental cults. Levels 5-10. The characters strike at the four head- quarters of these evil cults while investigating the cults' activities in the surrounding region. While the characters are battling one cult in its headquarters, the other three cults might still be wreaking havoc nearby, forcing the characters to divide their attention, Levels 11-16. Finally, the characters discover an ancient Temple of the Elder Elemental Eye deep beneath the cults' separate temples, and they strive to contain the damage wrought by the cults' activities and thwart the cults' evil leaders before these leaders unleash an apocalypse. Though this adventure is set in the world of the For- gotten Realms, it includes notes on how you might transplant it into Greyhawk or any other setting. Tuz THE Evi. North of the Free City of Greyhawk, a demigod named luz has reclaimed the vast tract of land he lost after being imprisoned under Castle Greyhawk by the archmage Zagig Yragerne. The newly freed luz aims to lay waste to the kingdoms, steadings, temples, and outposts of his rivals. To that end, luz's spies are searching for powerful Artifacts they can use to ensure victory, while evil creatures spawn in luz's homeland and threaten neighboring realms. Adventurers can thwart luz by keeping evil Artifacts out of his hands and defeating the vile creatures that serve him. Goals of Iuz. Install loyal operatives in settlements across Eastern Oerik, search libraries and vaults for lore pertaining to ancient and powerful magic, scour dungeons for lost Artifacts and other magic items, secure such items, and use magic and mon- sters to conquer rival nations. An Iuz Arc. The conflict between adventurers and luz might follow this broad outline: Levels 1-4, Early in their adventuring careers, the characters might face what appear to be ordinary toughs who are disrupting mining operations near the Free City of Greyhawk (see "Beyond the City Walls" in this chapter), only to discover these toughs are agents of some greater villain. The identity of this villain remains a mystery---for now. If you use the adventure "Miner Difficulties" from chapter 4, NPCs speaking to the characters might assume the trouble in the mine is related to these toughs and their bullying. Levels 5-10. You might use the adventure "Horns of luz to the characters. After their return from that expedition, they start having unpleasant en- counters with the City Watch in Greyhawk. Even- tually, they discover that Captain-General Sental Nurev is being manipulated by the leaders of Stoink, a petty fief in the Bandit Kingdoms. When the characters undertake an expedition into that dangerous realm to confront Stoink's leaders and free the captain-general's captive brother, they discover that the villains were agents of luz. Levels 11-16. luz and the Horned Society launch an all-out invasion into the Shield Lands, overwhelm- ing its defenses and moving toward Furyondy. The characters might have adventures to muster forces in surrounding lands and bring them to Furyondy's defense or hinder Iuz's advance. Levels 17-20. Finally, the characters discover that luz's assault is merely a cover to distract the southern realms from his true aim: retrieving the Eye and Hand of Vecna from an ancient keep on Lake Quag. The characters confront luz at the shores of the lake, perhaps facing a terrible choice: Will they wield the power of Vecna to stop luz, or will they risk luz wielding that awful might against them? # The Greyhawk Setting The planet Oerth is at the very center of a Wild- space system called Greyspace. (See chapter 6 for more information about Wildspace). Oerth has two moons: Luna (a great white moon, also called the Mistress) and Celene (a smaller blue moon, also called the Handmaiden). Greyspace's sun orbits Oerth, rather than the other way around. The sun takes 360 days to travel once around Oerth. Luna waxes and wanes in fixed cycles of 28 days each, upon which the months are based, while Celene follows a path that has full moons only four times each year, coinciding with four lunar festivals. Your Wortp's CALENDAR What does your campaign's calendar look like? The more your campaign calendar resembles the one that's familiar to you and your players, the easier it will be to remember and use. Familiar names for months and days of the week lend your campaign a wonderful simplicity that many players will appreciate. A calendar that uses ten- day weeks or names such as "Moonday" and "Coldeven" is harder for players to internalize but reminds them they're in a fantasy world, The Greyhawk calendar has twelve months and seven-day weeks like the Gregorian calendar, but gives unique names to months and days and introduces festivals that fall outside the calendar's months, giving it a fantastical feel. of the Beast" from chapter 4 to introduce an agent # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK 46 Days OF THE WEEK Starday Sunday Moonday Godsday Waterday Earthday Freeday (Saturday) (Sunday) (Monday) (Tuesday) (Wednesday) (Thursday) (Friday) Day of Worship Day of Rest MONTHS AND FESTIVALS The standard year is 360 days long and consists of twelve twenty-eight-day months (each month divided into four seven-day weeks) and four six-day lunar festivals (Need- fest, Growfest, Richfest, and Brewfest). The midwinter festival of Needfest is considered the start of the year. The diagram here shows the months and festivals that make up a year. # Factions And Organizations In addition to the many political entities that dot the lands of the Flanaess and the temples of its many gods, several organizations operate across national borders in pursuit of their goals. Some of these organizations could serve as patrons or allies of adventurers in a Greyhawk campaign, while others might appear as villains. Some might even accept adven- turers as members. Circle of Eight. Some of the greatest spell- casters of the world of Greyhawk form the Circle of Eight, a group dedicated to preserving balance in the world. The group's general aim is to prevent any single country, faction, or other organized group from becoming too powerful and overwhelming others. The membership of the Circle of Eight is secret but includes Mordenkainen (the strategist behind the group), Bigby, Jallarzi Sallavar- ian, Otiluke, and Otto. Knights of the Watch. The order of the Knights of the Watch originated as a military force protecting the lands of Bissel, Gran March, Geoff, and Keoland from hostile neighbors to the north and west (par- ticularly Ket and the Ulakandar). Though Watchers maintain strongholds along the border with Ket, most of their energy is spent defending against giants and dragons in the western mountains. The Watchers are sworn to an ascetic and disciplined code, and they train rigorously to the exclusion of personal property or other attachments. Order of the Hart. The knights of the Order of the Hart were organized to preserve the freedom of the states of Furyondy, Veluna, and Highfolk against the threats of bandits and hostile neighbors. These nations have little centralized authority or military power, so the knights have historically served as a # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK first line of defense against these varied threats. In recent years, they have mobilized against the rising threats of luz and Elemental Evil, forcing them to broaden the scope of their operations into neighbor- ing realms where these evils are active. Scarlet Order. The Scarlet Order is a monastic or- der of Suloise militarists whose spies and assassins have infiltrated many courts and castles through- out the Flanaess, ready to strike. The leader of the order is a seemingly immortal being known as the Father of Obedience, Korenth Zan. He is rumored to be a Suloise monk who walked the lands of Oerik long before the Rain of Colorless Fire destroyed the Suloise Empire. Others claim Korenth is a red dragon---a former consort of Tiamat who became trapped in human form. Whatever the true story, the Father of Obedience is revered by all who pledge their lives to the Scarlet Order. His goals---and, by extension, the order's goals---are shrouded in mys- tery and could one day tilt the balance of power across the whole of Eastern Oerik. ADVENTURERS AND ORGANIZATIONS \] Factions and organizations aimed at player char- acters can connect adventurers to your world, providing ties to key NPCs and a clear agenda be- yond individual gain. In the same way, villainous organizations create an ongoing sense of menace beyond the threat of solitary foes. Having different characters tied to different factions can create interesting situations at the gaming table, as long as those factions have similar goals and don't work in opposition to one another all the time. Adventurers representing different factions might have competing interests or priorities while they pursue the same goals. Adventurer organizations are also a great source of special rewards beyond Experience Points and treasure. Increased standing in an organization might come with concrete benefits such as ac- cess to an organization's information, equipment, magic, and other resources. See "Renown" in chapter 3 for rules you can use to track charac- i ters' standing in an organization. \_ # Magic In Greyhawk In the world of Greyhawk, as in most D&D worlds, magic is widespread but still wondrous and some- times frightening. People everywhere know about magic, and most people see evidence of it at some point in their lives. Magic permeates the cosmos and moves through the ancient possessions of legendary heroes, the mysterious ruins of fallen empires, those touched by the gods, creatures born with supernat- ural power, and individuals who study the secrets of the multiverse. Histories and fireside tales are filled with the exploits of those who wield magic. What normal folk know of magic depends on where they live and whether they know people who practice magic. Citizens of an isolated hamlet might not have seen true magic used for generations ex- cept the strange powers of the old hermit living in the nearby woods, which they regard with suspicion and mention only in whispers. By contrast, magic is common enough in the Free City of Greyhawk that the Guild of Wizardry teaches magic and sells spellcasting services. Exten- sive codes of law govern the use and abuse of magic. The law treats magical coercion as a major crime, and punishes the public use of magic in situations that could harm people or property. MYSTERIES OF GREYHAWK Eastern Oerik is a realm of many mysteries, several of which are described below. Bat-Folk of Hepmonaland. Separated from Eastern Oerik by the Tilva Strait, Hepmonaland is a rela- tively small continent that few people of the Flan- aess known much about. Those who have explored od the north spur of Hepmonaland report dense rain- forests, severe tropical storms, steamy wetlands, and a fetid swamp (called the Pelisso Swamp). Ad- venturers are sometimes lured into Hepmonaland's rainforests by ancient ruins, including tombs and shrines left behind by an ancient civilization of bat- like humanoids whose history is largely forgotten. Devastating Magic. Almost a thousand years ago, the war between the Baklunish and Suloise empires came to a horrific end. The Baklunish people who lived in what is now the Dry Steppes called down a rain of colorless fire that burned all living things, ignited the landscape, and reduced the Suloise lands to ashes, creating the Sea of Dust. In retaliation, Suloise survivors invoked their own magic to dev- astate the Baklunish lands. What magic was respon- sible for the Rain of Colorless Fire and the Invoked Devastation? What would happen if such magic fell into the wrong hands today? A central portion of the Dry Steppes, where the seat of the Baklunish empire stood, is said to remain pleasant and rich, roamed by Baklunish nomads. The former Suloise capital, by contrast, in the heart of the Sea of Dust, is beset by howling winds, terri- \| ble dust storms, and rains of volcanic ash and cin- ders from the nearby Hellfurnaces. Land of Black Ice. Those who have ventured far north of the Burneal Forest tell of a strange phe- nomenon. Instead of normal stark-white snow and translucent blue-white ice, there is an endless land- scape of deep-blue ice partially covered in snow. Strange arctic monsters prowl these fields of dark ice. Stranger still, a verdant land is rumored to exist beyond the ice, where the sun never sets. Riches of the Bright Desert. The Bright Desert, walled off from the rest of the Flanaess by the monster-infested hills of the Abbor-Alz and the aptly named Gnatmarsh, is supposedly filled with copper, silver, gold, and precious stones. The harsh climate, wildly varying temperatures, and hostile inhabitants discourage exploration. Expeditions have attempted to penetrate the Bright Desert and extract its riches, but none have ever returned. Riftcanyon. Between the Bandit Kingdoms and the Shield Lands stretches a deep canyon, ten miles wide at the ends, thirty miles wide at its midsec- tion, and 180 miles long. The Riftcanyon, which is more than a mile deep, is home to at least one blue dragon and has tunnels near its base that lead to the Underdark. White Plume Mountain. Situated just south of the Riftcanyon, the ever-smoking White Plume Moun- tain has always been a subject of superstitious awe to the neighboring villagers. People still travel many miles to gaze upon this natural wonder, though few dare to approach it closely, as it is reputed to be the haunt of demons and devils. The occasional # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK 147 " Gops oF GREYHAWK Name and Epithet Home Plane Typical Worshipers Symbol Beory, Heart of Oerth\* Material Plane Farmers, herders Green disk Berei of the Hearth Bytopia Families, farmers Sheaf of wheat stalks Boccob the Uncaring, Arch- Outlands Sages, spellcasters, seers Eye within a pentagram mage of the Gods\* Celestian, the Far Wanderer Astral Plane Wanderers, astronomers Arc of seven stars inside a circle Cuthbert of the Cudgel Arcadia Practical, honest folk Circle at the center of a starburst of lines Ehlonna of the Forests Beastlands Hunters, foragers Unicorn horn Erythnul, the Many Pandemonium Raiders, bandits, berserkers \| Blood drop Fharlanghn, the Dwelleron Outlands Travelers Circle crossed by a curved the Horizon horizon line Heironeous the Invincible \| Mount Celestia Knights, soldiers Lightning bolt Hextor, Scourge of Battle Acheron Soldiers, tyrants Six down-pointing arrows in a fan ~\*~ Incabulos, the Black Rider\* Hades Necromancers, those who Reptilian eye within a hor- oe seek to ward off illness izontal diamond --) Istus, Weaver of Our Fate\* --- Mechanus Seers, advisers Spindle with three strands luz the Evilf Material Plane ---\_ His subjects and allies Grinning human skull Kord, the Brawler Ysgard Athletes, berserkers Spears and maces radiating from a point Nerull, the Reaper\* Carceri Murderers, necromancers Skull with a scythe Obad-Hai, the Shalm Outlands Hunters, gatherers, hermits \| Oak leaf and acorn Olidammara, the Laughing Ysgard Revelers, gamblers, Laughing mask Rogue pranksters Pelor, the Radiant Sun\* Elysium Healers, the compassionate Sun Pholtus of the Blinding Light Arcadia Judges, lawyers, arbiters Silver sun partially eclipsed by a crescent moon Ralishaz, the Unlooked For --- Limbo Gamblers Three bone fate-casting sticks Rao, the Mediator\* Mount Celestia Mediators, sages, scientists \| White heart Syrul Oathbreaker Gehenna Liars, charlatans, traitors Forked tongue Tharizdun, the Eater of Imprisoned ina \_ Nihilistic cultists Spiral rune Worlds demiplane Trithereon, the Summoner Arborea Rebels, individualists Triskelion Ulaa, the Bejeweled Arcadia Miners, jewelers, quarriers Ruby-hearted mountain Vecna, the Whispered One = Unknown Necromancers, undead, those An eye in the palm of a who keep or unearth secrets \_ left hand Wee Jas, the Witch Acheron Spellcasters, advisers Red skull in front of fireball © #Greater god Demi disappearance of those who stray too close to the Plume reinforces this belief. White Plume Mountain is detailed in Tales from the Yawning Portal. Gops OF GREYHAWK The Gods of Greyhawk table shows many of the most popular deities worshiped in the Flanaess, Greater gods and demigods are marked as such; the others are lesser gods. Many other deities and demigods are also worshiped in the Flanaess, beyond those shown on the table. Some deities of Greyhawk have also transcended their origin on this world to impact the broader multiverse. Two of these, Tharizdun and Vecna, are described in appendix A. The greater gods of Greyhawk rarely get directly involved with happenings on Oerth. Lesser gods are more likely to manifest in some form on the Material Plane and interact with their worshipers. Cuthbert, for example, is well known for appearing in mortal guise, appearing as a dirt-covered farmer, a wanderer robed in brown and green, or an elderly tinker. And of the many quasi-deities that appear on Oerth, most prominent among them is Iuz, a demi- god who rules his own nation in the Flanaess. # Free City Of Greyhawk Would-be heroes are drawn to the Free City of Greyhawk by promises of adventure. The city is rife with opportunities for peril and plunder. The city stands on the eastern banks of the Selin- tan River. The river flows south from the Nyr Dyv (the Lake of Unknown Depths) down to Woolly Bay and remains easily navigable for its entire length. Once a frontier hub of the Great Kingdom of Aerdy, Greyhawk proclaimed itself free and inde- pendent seventy-eight years ago, claiming the Selin- tan basin as its territory. Adventurers drawn to the nearby ruins of Castle Greyhawk have provided a steady influx of cash to the city in the years since. Throughout this section, if a creature's name appears in bold type, you'll find that creature's stat block in the Monster Manual. If a creature's align- ment isn't specified, you can decide what it is. # Start Here The City of Greyhawk is a great starting point for a D&D campaign for many reasons, as discussed in the sections that follow. ADVENTURE Hooks The city contains plenty of rumors, local legends, and quest givers, any of which could point char- acters to their next adventure. The sample adven- tures in chapter 4 can all begin in the Free City of Greyhawk. Write Poume Mountain is # Wonder---and A Haunt O RP # Bastion Friendly There are ample places within the city and on the city's outskirts where adventurers can build Bastions (see chapter 8). Key CONFLICTS Two of the three central conflicts of the Greyhawk setting---the threats of Elemental Evil and luz---are the source of major tension and intrigue in the Free City of Greyhawk. The third conflict, involving evil dragons, is a looming threat nearby, particularly in the Mistmarsh, the hills of the Abbor-Alz, and the Bright Desert. Loca Hur.y-BurLy Greyhawk has a frontier spirit atypical for a settle- ment of its size. The locals are a tough and rowdy lot. Adventurers seeking action don't need to look far, as the city contains more than its fair share of troublemakers.