# CHAPTER \| TREASURE oe Peer =. \> ie -\~2 4 313 314 The Sword of Kas also seeks to destroy anyone cor- rupted by the Eye and Hand of Vecna. Destroying the Sword. A creature attuned to both the Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Vecna can use the Wish property of those combined Artifacts to un- make the Sword of Kas, provided the sword is within 30 feet of the spell's caster. Upon casting Wish, the creature makes a DC 18 Charisma saving throw. On a failed save, nothing happens, and the Wish spell is wasted. On a successful save, the Sword of Kas is destroyed. oe ---\< ------ Sworp OF LIFE STEALING Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Rare (Requires Attunement) When you attack a creature with this magic weapon and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, that target takes an extra 15 Necrotic damage if it isn't a Construct or an Undead, and you gain Temporary Hit Points equal to the amount of Necrotic damage taken. SworD OF SHARPNESS Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, or Scimitar), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) When you attack an object with this magic weapon and hit, maximize your weapon damage dice against the target. When you attack a creature with this weapon and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, that target takes an extra 14 Slashing damage and gains 1 Exhaustion level. ---\_---- ----- os \<------------ SworD OF VENGEANCE Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Uncommon (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. Curse. This weapon is cursed and possessed by a vengeful spirit. Becoming attuned to it extends the curse to you. As long as you remain cursed, you are unwilling to part with the weapon, keeping it on your person at all times. While attuned to this weapon, you have Disadvantage on attack rolls made with weapons other than this one. In addition, while the weapon is on your person, you must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw whenever you take damage from another creature in combat. On a failed save, you must attack the creature that damaged you until you drop to O Hit Points or it does or until you can't reach the crea- ture to make a melee attack against it. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE ST Pen aes \<5)" --- You can break the curse in the usual ways. Alter- natively, casting Banishment on the weapon forces the vengeful spirit to leave it. The weapon then be- comes a +! Weapon with no other properties. SworD OF WOUNDING Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Rare (Requires Attunement) When you hit a creature with an attack using this magic weapon, the target takes an extra 2d6 Necrotic damage and must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be unable to regain Hit Points for 1 hour. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. SYLVAN TALON Weapon (Dagger, Rapier, Scimitar, Shortsword, Sickle, or Spear), Common (Requires Attunement) While this weapon is on your person, you under- stand the nonwritten communication of all Fey, and they understand yours. Secret Message. As a Magic action, you can use the weapon to cast Message. Once this property is used, it can't be used again until the next dawn. TALISMAN OF PuRE Goop Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Cleric or Paladin) This talisman is a mighty symbol of goodness. A Fiend or an Undead that touches the talisman takes 8d6 Radiant damage and takes the damage again each time it ends its turn holding or carrying the talisman. Holy Symbol. You can use the talisman as a Holy Symbol. You gain a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls while you wear or hold it. Pure Rebuke. The talisman has 7 charges. While wearing or holding the talisman, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge and target one creature you can see on the ground within 120 feet of yourself. A flaming fissure opens under the tar- get, and the target makes a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw. If the target is a Fiend or an Undead, it has Disadvantage on the save. On a failed save, the tar- get falls into the fissure and is destroyed, leaving no remains. On a successful save, the target isn't cast into the fissure but takes 4d6 Psychic damage from the ordeal. In either case, the fissure then closes, leaving no trace of its existence. When you expend the last charge, the talisman disperses into motes of golden light and is destroyed. Sworo of Lire STreaLinG (LONGsworRo) Sworo oF SHARPNESS (Grearsworo) + Svivan TALON (Scimitar) TALISMAN OF THE SPHERE Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) While holding or wearing this talisman, you have Advantage on any Intelligence (Arcana) check you make to control a Sphere of Annihilation. In addition, when you start your turn in control of a Sphere of Annihilation, you can take a Magic action to move it 10 feet plus a number of additional feet equal to 10 times your Intelligence modifier. This movement doesn't have to be in a straight line. TALISMAN OF ULTIMATE EVIL Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) This item symbolizes unrepentant evil. A creature that isn't a Fiend or an Undead that touches the talisman takes 8d6 Necrotic damage and takes the damage again each time it ends its turn holding or carrying the talisman. Holy Symbol. You can use the talisman as a Holy Symbol. You gain a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls while you wear or hold it. Ultimate End. The talisman has 6 charges. While wearing or holding the talisman, you can take a Magic action to expend \| charge and target one creature you can see on the ground within 120 feet of yourself. A flaming fissure opens under the target, and the target makes a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw. If the target is a Celestial, it has Disadvantage on the save. On a failed save, the target falls into the fissure and is destroyed, leaving no re- mains. On a successful save, the target isn't cast into the fissure but takes 4d6 Psychic damage from the # Talisman Of Ucrimare Evie # Talisman Of The Sphere ordeal. In either case, the fissure then closes, leaving no trace of its existence. When you expend the last charge, the talisman dissolves into foul-smelling slime and is destroyed. TALKING DOLL Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement) While this doll is within 5 feet of you, you can spend a Short Rest telling it to say up to six phrases, none of which can be more than six words long, and set a condition under which the doll speaks each phrase. You can also replace old phrases with new ones. Whatever the condition, it must occur within 5 feet of the doll to make it speak. For example, whenever someone picks up the doll, it might say, "I want a piece of candy." The doll's phrases are lost when your Attunement to the doll ends. TANKARD OF SOBRIETY Wondrous Item, Common This tankard has a stern face sculpted into one side. You can drink ale, wine, or any other nonmagical alcoholic beverage poured into it without becoming inebriated. The tankard has no effect on magical liq- uids or harmful substances such as poison. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 315 316 TENTACLE Rop Rod, Rare (Requires Attunement) This rod ends in three rubbery tentacles. While holding the rod, you can take a Magic action to direct the tentacles to stretch outward, each one attacking a creature you can see within 15 feet of yourself. For each tentacle, make a melee attack roll with a +9 bonus. A tentacle deals 1d6 Psychic damage on a hit. If you hit the same target with all three tentacles, the target must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or have the Restrained con- dition until you have the Incapacitated condition, until you take a Bonus Action to release the target, or until the target is no longer within 15 feet of you. While Restrained in this way, the target takes 3d6 Psychic damage at the start of each of its turns. At the end of each of its turns, the target repeats the save, ending the effect on itself on a success. THUNDEROUS GREATCLUB Weapon (Greatclub), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While you are attuned to this magic weapon, your Strength is 20 unless your Strength is already equal to or greater than that score. The weapon deals an extra 1d8 Thunder damage to any creature it hits and an extra 3d8 Thunder damage to objects it hits that aren't being worn or carried. THUNDEROUS Grearcius # CHAPTER \| TREASURE The weapon has the following additional properties. Clap of Thunder. As a Magic action, you can strike the weapon against a hard surface to create a loud clap of thunder audible out to 300 feet. You also create a 30-foot Cone of thunderous energy. Each creature in the Cone must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or have the Prone condition. Nonmagical objects in the Cone that aren't being worn or carried take 3d8 Thunder damage. Earthquake. As a Magic action, you can strike the weapon against the ground to create an intense seis- mic disturbance in a 50-foot-radius circle centered on the point of impact. Structures in contact with the ground in that area take 50 Bludgeoning dam- age, and each creature on the ground in that area must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition. If that creature is also concentrating, it must succeed on a DC 20 Consti- tution saving throw or its Concentration is broken. In addition, you can cause a 30-foot-deep, 10-foot- wide fissure to open up on the ground anywhere in the area. Any creature on a spot where the fissure opens must succeed on a DC 20 Dexterity saving throw, falling into the fissure on a failed save or moving with the fissure's edge on a successful one. Any structure on a spot where the fissure opens collapses into the fissure. Once you use this prop- erty, it can't be used again until the next dawn. TacKinG Doi Tenracce Roo TOME OF CLEAR THOUGHT Wondrous Item, Very Rare This book contains memory and logic exercises, and its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's contents and practicing its guidelines, your Intelligence increases by 2, to a maximum of 30, The manual then loses its magic but regains it in a century. TOME OF LEADERSHIP AND INFLUENCE Wondrous Item, Very Rare This book contains guidelines for influencing and charming others, and its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's contents and practic- ing its guidelines, your Charisma increases by 2, to a maximum of 30. The manual then loses its magic but regains it in a century. # Tome Of The Stilled Tongue Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Wizard) This book has a desiccated tongue pinned to its front cover. Five of these tomes exist, and it's un- known which one is the original. The tongue on the first Tome of the Stilled Tongue belonged to a treacherous former servant of the lich Vecna. The tongues pinned to the covers of the four copies came from other spellcasters who crossed Vecna. The first few pages of each tome are filled with indecipherable scrawls. The remaining pages are blank. Tome or UNODERSTANOING Tome or Leaoersmir AND INFLUENCE While attuned to this item, you can use it as a Spellbook and an Arcane Focus. In addition, while holding the tome, you can take a Bonus Action to cast a spell you have written in this tome, without expending a spell slot or using any Verbal or So- matic components. Once used, this property of the tome can't be used again until the next dawn. Only you can remove the tongue from the book's cover. If you do so, all spells written in the book are permanently erased. Vecna watches anyone using this tome and can write cryptic messages in it. These messages typi- cally fade away after they are read. TOME OF UNDERSTANDING Wondrous Item, Very Rare This book contains intuition and insight exercises, and its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's contents and practicing its guidelines, your Wisdom increases by 2, to a maximum of 30. The manual then loses its magic, but regains it in a century. # Trident Of Fish Command Weapon (Trident), Uncommon (Requires Attunement) This magic weapon has 3 charges, and it regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While you carry it, you can expend 1 charge to cast Dominate Beast (save DC 15) from it on a Beast that has a Swim Speed. Tome of Crear THOUGHT # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Vorear Sworo {LONGSWORD) UNIVERSAL SOLVENT Wondrous Item, Legendary This tube holds milky liquid with a strong alcohol smell. When found, a tube contains 1d6 + 1 ounces. You can take a Utilize action to pour 1 or more ounces of solvent from the tube onto a surface within reach. Each ounce instantly dissolves up to 1 square foot of adhesive it touches, including Sover- eign Glue. VETERAN'S CANE Wondrous Item, Common As a Bonus Action, you can transform this walking cane into an ordinary Longsword or change the Longsword back into a walking cane. In either case, you must be holding the item. Vicious WEAPON Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rare This magic weapon deals an extra 2d6 damage to any creature it hits. This extra damage is of the same type as the weapon's normal damage. VORPAL SWORD Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, or Scimitar), Legendary (Requires Attunement) You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. In addition, the weapon ignores Resistance to Slashing damage. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE UNiversar Souvenr TRIDENT OF Fis« Commano YQ "s When you use this weapon to attack a creature that has at least one head and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, you cut off one of the creature's heads. The creature dies if it can't survive without the lost head. A creature is immune to this effect if it has Immunity to Slashing damage, if it doesn't have or need a head, or if the DM decides that the creature is too big for its head to be cut off with this weapon. Such a creature instead takes an extra 30 Slashing damage from the hit. If the creature has Legendary Resistance, it can expend one daily use of that trait to avoid losing its head, taking the extra damage instead. WALLOPING AMMUNITION Weapon (Any Ammunition), Common A creature hit by this ammunition must succeed on a DC 10 Strength saving throw or have the Prone condition. oo - - --- WAND OF BINDING Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement) This wand has 7 charges. Spells. While holding the wand, you can cast one of the spells (save DC 17) on the following table from it. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Hold Monster 5 Hold Person 2 Wano of Enemy Derecrion Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 +1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. WAND OF CONDUCTING Wand, Common This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend I charge and create orchestral music by waving it around. The music can be heard out to 120 feet and ends when you stop waving the wand. Regaining Charges. The wand regains all expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, a sad tuba sound plays as the wand crumbles into dust and is destroyed. WAND OF ENEMY DETECTION Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge. For 1 min- ute, you know the direction of the nearest creature Hostile to you within 60 feet, but not its distance from you. The wand can sense the presence of Hos- tile creatures that are Invisible, ethereal, disguised, or hidden, as well as those in plain sight. The effect ends if you stop holding the wand. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. Wano oF Fear Wand oF Firesaus WAND OF FEAR Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement) This wand has 7 charges. Spells. While holding the wand, you can cast one of the spells (save DC 15) on the following table from it. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Command ("flee" or "grovel" only) 1 Fear (60-foot Cone) 3 Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. WAND OF FIREBALLS Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can expend no more than 3 charges to cast Fireball (save DC 15) from it. For 1 charge, you cast the level 3 ver- sion of the spell. You can increase the spell's level by 1 for each additional charge you expend. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Wano oF Macic' Derecrion Z Wano of Macic Missices WAND oF Paracysis Wano oF Potymoren bo WAND OF LIGHTNING BOLTS Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can expend no more than 3 charges to cast Lightning Bolt (save DC 15) from it. For 1 charge, you cast the level 3 version of the spell. You can increase the spell's level by 1 for each additional charge you expend. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. WAND OF MAGIC DETECTION Wand, Uncommon This wand has 3 charges. While holding it, you can expend \| charge to cast Detect Magic from it. The wand regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. WAND OF MAGIC MISSILES Wand, Uncommon This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can expend no more than 3 charges to cast Magic Missile from it. For 1 charge, you cast the level 1 version of the spell. You can increase the spell's level by 1 for each additional charge you expend. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. WAND OF OrcuS Wand, Artifact (Requires Attunement) Crafted and wielded by Orcus, this ghastly wand slips from the demon lord's grasp from time to time. When it does, it magically appears wherever the demon lord senses an opportunity to achieve some fell goal. The wand is topped with a skull that once be- longed to a human hero slain by Orcus. The wand can magically change in size to better conform to the grip of its user. All Holy Water within 10 feet of the wand is destroyed. Any creature besides Orcus that tries to attune to the wand makes a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. On a successful save, the creature takes 10d6 Ne- crotic damage. On a failed save, the creature dies and, if it is a Humanoid, turns into a Zombie. Magic Weapon. You can wield the wand as a magic Mace that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. The wand deals an extra 2d12 Necrotic damage on a hit. Random Properties. The Wand of Orcus has the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - 2 minor beneficial properties - L major beneficial property - 2 minor detrimental properties - 1 major detrimental property The detrimental properties of the Wand of Orcus are suppressed while the wand is attuned to Orcus. Protection. You gain a +3 bonus to Armor Class while holding the wand. Spells. The wand has 7 charges and regains 1d4 + 3 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the wand, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it (save DC 18). The table indi- cates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Animate Dead 1 Blight 2 Circle of Death 3 Finger of Death 3 Power Word Kill 4 Speak with Dead 1 While attuned to the wand, Orcus or a follower blessed by him can cast each of the wand's spells using 2 fewer charges (minimum of 0). Call Undead. While holding the wand, you can take a Magic action to conjure 15 Skeletons and 15 Zombies. These Undead magically rise up from the ground or otherwise form in unoccupied spaces within 300 feet of you and obey your commands until they are destroyed or until the next dawn, when they collapse into inanimate piles of bones and rotting corpses. Once you use this property, you can't use it again until the next dawn. While holding the wand, Orcus can summon any kind of Undead, not just skeletons and zombies. These Undead don't perish at dawn the following day, remaining until Orcus dismisses them. Sentience. The Wand of Orcus is a sentient Chaotic Evil item with an Intelligence of 16, a Wisdom of 12, and a Charisma of 16. It has hearing and Darkvision out to 120 feet. The wand communicates telepathically with its wielder and speaks Abyssal and Common. Personality. The wand's purpose is to help satisfy Orcus's desire to slay everything in the multiverse. The wand is cruel, nihilistic, and bereft of humor. To further Orcus's goals, the wand feigns devotion to its current user and makes grandiose promises that it has no intention of fulfilling, such as vowing to help its user overthrow Orcus. Destroying the Wand. Destroying the Wand of Or- cus requires that it be taken to the Positive Energy Plane by the ancient hero whose skull surmounts it. For this to happen, the long-lost hero must first be restored to life---no easy task, given the fact that Orcus has imprisoned the hero's soul and keeps it hidden and well guarded. Bathing the wand in positive energy (such as that which permeates the Positive Plane) causes it to crack and explode, but unless the above conditions are met, the wand instantly re-forms on Orcus's layer of the Abyss. > - --- \~------- \$\$ WAND OF PARALYSIS Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge to cause a thin blue ray to streak from the tip toward a crea- ture you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The target must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Paralyzed condition for 1 minute. At the end of each of the target's turns, it repeats the save, ending the effect on itself on a success. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. WAND OF POLYMORPH Wand, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can expend \| charge to cast Polymorph (save DC 15) from it. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1420. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. WAND OF PYROTECHNICS Wand, Common This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend \| charge and create a harmless burst of multicolored light at a point you can see up to 120 feet away. The burst of light is accompanied by a crackling noise that can be heard up to 300 feet away. The light is as bright as a torch flame but lasts only a second. Regaining Charges. The wand regains ld6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand erupts in a harmless pyrotechnic display and is destroyed. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE " ee A ol hit 32r 322 i --- --- WAND OF SECRETS Wand, Uncommon This wand has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge, and if a se- cret door or trap is within 60 feet of you, the wand pulses and points at the one nearest to you. rc \_ \_ ----= = WAND OF THE WAR MAGE, +1, +2, OR +3 Wand, Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3) (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) While holding this wand, you gain a bonus to spell attack rolls determined by the wand's rarity. In ad- dition, you ignore Half Cover when making a spell attack roll. Cc WAND OF WEB Wand, Uncommon (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can expend 1 charge to cast Web (save DC 13) from it. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into ashes and is destroyed. en WAND OF WONDER Wand, Rare (Requires Attunement) This wand has 7 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge while choosing a point within 120 feet of yourself. That location becomes the point of origin of a spell or other magical effect determined by rolling on the Wano of Secrers Wano or Wes Wano of Wonoer # CHAPTER \| TREASURE ee eee ter ss Wand of Wonder Effects table. Spells cast from the wand have a save DC of 15. If a spell's maximum range is normally less than 120 feet, it becomes 120 feet when cast from the wand. If an effect has multi- ple possible subjects, the DM determines randomly which among them are affected. Regaining Charges. The wand regains 1d6 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the wand's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the wand crumbles into dust and is destroyed. WaND oF WonpeR EFFeEctTs 14100 Effect 01-20 You cast a spell originating from the chosen point. Roll 1d10 to determine the spell: on a 1-2, Darkness; on a 3-4, Faerie Fire; on a 5-6, Fireball; on a 7-8, Slow; on a 9-10, Stinking Cloud. 21-25 Nothing happens at the chosen point of origin. Instead, you have the Stunned condi- tion until the start of your next turn, believ- ing something awesome just happened. 26-30 You cast Gust of Wind. The Line created by the spell extends from you to the chosen point of origin. 31-35 Nothing happens at the chosen point of ori- gin. Instead, you take 1d6 Psychic damage. 36-40 Heavy rain falls for 1 minute in a 120-foot- high, 60-foot-radius Cylinder centered on the chosen point of origin. During that time, the area of effect is Lightly Obscured. 41-45 Acloud of 600 oversized butterflies fills a 60-foot-high, 30-foot-radius Cylinder cen- tered on the chosen point of origin. The but- terflies remain for 10 minutes, during which time the area of effect is Heavily Obscured. Hibeiet ater coe im Wand oF tHe War Mace 1d100 46-50 51-55 56-60 61-64 65-68 69-72 73-77 78-82 Effect You cast Lightning Bolt. The Line created by the spell extends from you to the chosen point of origin. The creature closest to the chosen point of origin is enlarged as if you had cast Enlarge/ Reduce on it. If the target isn't you and can't be affected by that spell, you become the target instead. A magically formed creature appears in an unoccupied space as close to the chosen point of origin as possible. The creature isn't under your control, acts as it normally would, and disappears after 1 hour or when it drops to 0 Hit Points. Roll 1d4 to determine which creature appears. Ona 1, a Rhinoceros appears; on a 2, an Elephant appears; and on a 3-4, a Rat appears. Grass covers a 60-foot-radius circle of ground, with the center of that circle as close to the chosen point of origin as pos- sible. Grass that's already there grows to ten times its normal size and remains over- grown for 1 minute. An object of the DM's choice disappears into the Ethereal Plane. The object must be neither worn nor carried, within 120 feet of the chosen point of origin, and no larger than 10 feet in any dimension. If there are no such objects in range, nothing happens. Nothing happens at the chosen point of origin. Instead, you shrink as if you had cast Enlarge/Reduce on yourself and remain in that state for 1 minute. Leaves grow from the creature nearest to the chosen point of origin. Unless they are picked off, the leaves turn brown and fall off after 24 hours. Nothing happens at the chosen point of ori- gin. Instead, a burst of colorful, shimmering light extends from you in a 30-foot Emana- tion. Each creature in the area must succeed ona DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Blinded condition for 1 minute. A creature repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. # 14100 83-87 Effect Nothing happens at the chosen point of ori- gin. Instead, you cast Invisibility on yourself. 88-92 Nothing happens at the chosen point of origin. Instead, a stream of 1d4 x 10 gems, each worth 1 GP, shoots from the wand's tip in a Line 30 feet long and 5 feet wide toward the chosen point of origin. Each gem deals 1 Bludgeoning damage, and the total dam- age of the gems is divided equally among all creatures in the Line. 93-97 You cast Polymorph, targeting the creature closest to the chosen point of origin. Roll 1d4 to determine the target's new form. On a 1, the new form is a Black Bear; on a 2, the new form is a Giant Wasp; on a 3-4, the new form is a Frog. 98-00 The creature closest to the chosen point of origin makes a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature has the Restrained condition and begins to turn to stone. While Restrained in this way, the creature repeats the save at the end of its next turn. On a successful save, the effect ends, On a failed save, the creature has the Petrified condition instead of the Restrained condition. The petrification lasts until the creature is freed by the Greater Restoration spell or similar magic. WAVE Weapon (Trident), Artifact (Requires Attunement) Held in the dungeon of White Plume Mountain, Wave is engraved with images of waves, shells, and sea creatures. You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. When you roll a 20 on the d20 for an attack roll with this weapon, the target takes an extra 21 Necrotic damage. While holding Wave, you gain the following benefits: Combat Ready. You have Advantage on Initiative rolls. Underwater Adaptation. A bubble of air forms around your head while you are underwa- ter, allowing you to breathe normally in that environment. CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 323 \<a epee ee Aquatic Command. Wave has 3 charges and re- gains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While you carry it, you can expend 1 charge to cast Dominate Beast (save DC 20) from it on a Beast that has a Swim Speed. Globe of Invulnerability. While holding Wave, you can cast the level 9 version of Globe of Invulnerability from it. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. Sentience. Wave is a sentient weapon of Neutral alignment, with an Intelligence of 14, a Wisdom of 10, and a Charisma of 18. It has hearing and Darkvi- sion out to 120 feet. The weapon communicates telepathically with its wielder and speaks Aquan., Personality. Wave zealously encourages mortals to worship sea gods and has a habit of humming sea chanteys. Conflict arises if the wielder fails to fur- ther the weapon's objectives in the world. Destroying Wave. Wave can be destroyed only on the island of Thunderforge, where it was forged. The weapon must be melted down by a storm giant or someone imbued with a storm giant's strength. Destroying Wave angers a god of the sea, who sends powerful agents to attack the island and punish the destroyers. # - ------ Ss --------- WEAPON, +1, +2, OR +3 Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3) You have a bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. The bonus is deter- mined by the weapon's rarity. o---*--- ---*---\_\_*---*---\_--- = # Weapon Of Warning Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Uncommon (Requires Attunement) As long as this weapon is within your reach and you are attuned to it, you and allies within 30 feet of you gain the following benefits. Alarm. The weapon magically awakens each sub- ject who is sleeping naturally when combat begins. This benefit doesn't wake a subject from magically induced sleep. Supernatural Readiness. Each subject has Advan- tage on its Initiative rolls. \ WELL OF MANY WorRLDS Wondrous Item, Legendary This fine black cloth, soft as silk, is folded up to the dimensions of a handkerchief. It unfolds into a cir- cular sheet 6 feet in diameter. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE oo se You can take a Magic action to unfold the Well of Many Worlds and place it on a solid surface, where- upon it forms a two-way, 6-foot-diameter, circular portal to another world or plane of existence. Each time the item opens a portal, the DM decides where it leads. The portal remains open until a creature within 5 feet of it takes a Magic action to close it by taking hold of the edges of the cloth and folding it up. Once the Well of Many Worlds has opened a portal, it can't do so again for 1d8 hours. co----\_--------- --- WHELM Weapon (Warhammer), Artifact (Requires Attunement by a Dwarf or a Creature Attuned to a Belt of Dwarvenkind) Whelm is a powerful weapon forged by dwarves and lost in the dungeon of White Plume Mountain. You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. Hurl. Whelm has the Thrown property with a normal range of 60 feet and a long range of 180 feet. When you hit with a ranged attack roll using Whelm, the target takes an extra 1d8 Force damage, or an extra 4d8 Force damage if the target is a Con- struct, an Elemental, or a Giant. Immediately after hitting or missing, the weapon flies back to your hand. Shock Wave. You can take a Magic action to strike the ground with Whelm and send a shock wave out from the point of impact. Each creature of your choice on the ground within 60 feet of that point must succeed on a DC 20 Constitution saving throw or have the Stunned condition for 1 minute. A crea- ture repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. Supernatural Awareness. While you are holding the weapon, it alerts you to the location of any se- cret or concealed doors within 30 feet of you. In addition, you can cast Detect Evil and Good or Locate Object from the weapon. Once you cast either spell, you can't cast it from the weapon again until the next dawn. Sentience. Whelm is a sentient, Lawful Neutral weapon with an Intelligence of 15, a Wisdom of 12, and a Charisma of 15. It has hearing and Darkvision out to 120 feet. The weapon communicates telepathically with its wielder and speaks Dwarvish, Giant, and Goblin. Personality. Whelm has ties to the dwarf clan that created it, called the Dankil or the Mightyhammer clan. It longs to be returned to that clan. Whelm's purpose is to protect dwarves. Conflict arises if the wielder doesn't share this goal. (Trioent) +! Weapon (War Pick) Destroying Whelm. Whelm can be dissolved in the acidic bile of a recently slain ancient black dragon. It can also be melted down in the forges of the Mightyhammer dwarf clan, but only by the rightful leader of that clan. WIND FAN Wondrous Item, Uncommon While holding this fan, you can cast Gust of Wind (save DC 13) from it. Each subsequent time the fan is used before the next dawn, it has a cumulative 20 percent chance of not working; if the fan fails to work, it tears into useless, nonmagical tatters. WINGED Boots Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) These boots have 4 charges and regain 1d4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the boots, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge, gaining a Fly Speed of 30 feet for 1 hour. If you are flying when the duration expires, you de- scend at a rate of 30 feet per round until you land. WEAPON OF WaRNING WINGS OF FivING Winceo Boors WINGS OF FLYING Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this cloak, you can take a Magic ac- tion to turn the cloak into a pair of wings on your back. The wings lasts for 1 hour or until you end the effect early as a Magic action. The wings give you a Fly Speed of 60 feet. If you are aloft when the wings disappear, you fall. When the wings disappear, you can't use them again for 1d12 hours. # Wraps Of Unarmed Power Wondrous Item, Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3) While wearing these wraps, you have a bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with your Unarmed Strikes. The bonus is determined by the wraps' rarity, and those strikes deal your choice of Force damage or their normal damage type. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 325 RANDOM Maaic ITEMS Use the tables in this section to randomly determine magic items the characters find in your adven- tures. The tables are sorted first by treasure theme (as described in the Monster Manual), and then by item rarity. If an item isn't as- sociated with a theme, roll 1d4 to decide which table to roll on next: on a1, roll on the Arcana tables; on a 2, Armaments; on a 3, Imple- ments; and on a 4, Relics. # Arcana Tables ARCANA---COMMON 14100 Item 01-02 Bead of Nourishment 03-04 Bead of Refreshment 05-07 Candle of the Deep 08-10 Cloak of Billowing 11-13 Cloak of Many Fashions 14-15 Clothes of Mending 16-17 Dark Shard Amulet 18-19 Enduring Spellbook 20-21 22-24 25-27 28-29 Ersatz Eye Hat of Vermin Hat of Wizardry Heward's Handy Spice Pouch Horn of Silent Alarm Instrument of Illusions Instrument of Scribing Lock of Trickery Mystery Key Orb of Direction Orb of Time Perfume of Bewitching Pipe of Smoke Monsters Potion of Climbing # 30-31 32-33 34-35 36-37 38-40 41-42 43-44 45-46 47-49 50-52 53-55 56-58 Pot of Awakening 59-60 Prosthetic Limb 61-64 Potion of Comprehension Rival Coin # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 1d100 65-66 67-68 69-82 Item Rope of Mending Ruby of the War Mage Spell Scroll (cantrip or level 1 spell) Staff of Adornment Staff of Birdcalls Staff of Flowers Talking Doll Tankard of Sobriety Wand of Conducting Wand of Pyrotechnics # 83-84 85-86 87-89 90-92 93-94 95-97 98-00 ARCANA---UNCOMMON 1d100 Item 01 = Amulet of Proof against Detection and Location 02 Baba Yaga's Dancing Broom 03-05 Bag of Holding 06-07 Bag of Tricks 08 Brooch of Shielding 09 = Broom of Flying 10 Cap of Water Breathing 11s Circlet of Blasting 12-13 Cloak of Protection 14 Cloak of the Manta Ray 15 Decanter of Endless Water 16 Deck of illusions 17-18 Driftglobe 19-20 Dust of Disappearance 21 Dust of Dryness 22 Dust of Sneezing and Choking 23-24 Elemental Gem 25 Enspelled Staff (cantrip or level 1 spell) 26 --- Eversmoking Bottle 27 «Eyes of Charming 28 Eyes of Minute Seeing 29-30 Figurine of Wondrous Power (silver raven) 31 Gem of Brightness 32. Hag Eye 1d100 33 34 35 36 37 38 39 40 4)-42 43 44 45 46-47 48-49 # 50-51 52-53 # 54-55 56-57 58-59 60-61 62 # 63 64-65 66-67 68-69 # 70 71-72 73-74 75-82 # 83 84 85-88 89-91 92-93 94-95 96-97 98-99 00 Item Hat of Disguise Headband of Intellect Helm of Comprehending Languages Helm of Telepathy Immovable Rod Lantern of Revealing Medallion of Thoughts Mithral Armor Necklace of Adaptation Oil of Slipperiness Pearl of Power Periapt of Health Philter of Love Potion of Animal Friendship Potion of Fire Breath Potion of Giant Strength (hill) Potion of Growth Potion of Poison Potion of Resistance Potion of Water Breathing Quaal's Feather Token (anchor, fan, or tree) Ring of Mind Shielding Robe of Useful Items Rod of the Pact Keeper, +1 Rope of Climbing Saddle of the Cavalier Sending Stones Slippers of Spider Climbing Spell Scroll (level 2 or 3 spell) Staff of the Adder Staff of the Python Wand of Magic Detection Wand of Magic Missiles Wand of Secrets Wand of the War Mage, +1 Wand of Web Wind Fan Winged Boots ARCANA---RARE 1d100 01 # 02-03 04 # 05-06 07 # 08-09 10 # H-12 13-14 15-16 V7 18 19 20-21 22-23 # 24-25 26-27 28 29-30 # 31-32 33-34 35 36 37-38 39 40 41-42 43-44 45-46 47 Item Bag of Beans Bead of Force Bow! of Commanding Water Elementals Bracers of Defense Brazier of Commanding Fire Elementals Cape of the Mountebank Censer of Controlling Air Elementals Chime of Opening Cloak of Displacement Cloak of the Bat Cube of Force Cube of Summoning Daern's Instant Fortress Enspelled Staff (level 2 or 3 spell) Figurine of Wondrous Power (bronze griffon, eb- ony fly, golden lions, ivory goats, marble elephant, onyx dog, or serpentine owl) Folding Boat Gem of Seeing Helm of Teleportation Heward's Handy Haversack Horseshoes of Speed loun Stone (reserve) fron Bands of Bilarro Mantle of Spell Resistance Necklace of Fireballs Oil of Etherealness Portable Hole Potion of Clairvoyance Potion of Diminution Potion of Gaseous Form Potion of Giant Strength (fire) 1d100 48-49 Item Potion of Giant Strength (frost or stone)