# CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY # Beastlands Adventures The Beastlands embodies wild, beautiful nature and the vibrant power of life thriving in the natural world. Visitors to the plane feel invigorated and more vital---their minds more alert, their reflexes sharpened, and their strides quickened. Hunger pangs are acute, but food and drink taste better than ever before. Sleep is always deep and restful, and sleepers always awaken alert. Adventures in the Beastlands might explore the ways that good philosophies, while purporting to value life, actually devalue the physical nature of life in favor of abstract concepts of law and ethics. Characters might end up in conflict with those who dismiss animals as inferior and irrelevant forms of life. BYTOPIA The surfaces of Bytopia's two layers face each other like the covers of a closed book. Looking up from Dothion, the "top" layer of the plane, a traveler can see Shurrock, its other layer, about a mile overhead. Both layers are idealized worlds that reflect the plane's philosophy of personal achievement along- side social interdependence. LAYERS OF BYTOPIA Layer Description Dothion Farms nestled among well-tamed woods are hubs of pastoral activity and individual industry. Small communities thrive around quar- ries and mills amid rough country and harsh weather. Shurrock BYTOPIA ADVENTURES Bytopia is the heaven of productive work, the satisfaction of a job well done. The goodness flowing through the plane creates feelings of goodwill and happiness in creatures dwelling there. While Dothion rewards those who seek a quiet life, Shurrock is the paradise of those who continually challenge and better themselves. The two layers of Bytopia are often referred to as the "Twin Paradises," and it's said that every action carried out on one layer has repercussions on the other---an equal and opposite reaction, though a more metaphorical than physical one. An adventure in Bytopia might challenge characters to recognize the impact their actions have on the world by wit- nessing the mirrored reactions to their deeds on the opposite layer. CARCERI The grim inspiration for all other prisons in exis- tence, Carceri is a plane of desolation and despair. Its six layers hold vast bogs, fetid jungles, wind- swept deserts, jagged mountains, frigid oceans, and black ice. All form a miserable home for the traitors and backstabbers trapped on this prison plane. # Layers Of Carceri Layer Description Orthrys The River Styx meanders through a layer of vast bogs and quicksand. Cathrys The stench of decay hangs over fetid jungles and scarlet plains. Minethys Stinging sand blows in unending storms, hiding the ruins of the ancient city Payratheon. Colothys Deep chasms cut between cruel mountains make foot travel nearly impossible. Porphatys Cold, acidic oceans are fed by constant black snow. Agathys Black ice streaked with red covers this frigid realm. # Prison Plane No one can leave Carceri easily. Magical efforts to leave the plane by any spell other than Wish simply fail. Portals and gates that open onto the plane be- come one-way only. Secret passages out of the plane exist, but they are hidden and well guarded by traps and deadly monsters. And though the River Styx flows between Carceri and its neighbors, the passage is extremely dangerous, and ferries leading out of Carceri are both rare and expensive. CARCERI ADVENTURES Carceri is a sunless plane of despair, of passions and poisons, and of realm-shattering betrayals. Hatreds run like a deep, slow-moving river, and there's no telling what the flood of treachery will consume next. It is said that prisoners can escape Carceri only by becoming stronger than whatever force imprisoned them there, but that's a difficult task on a plane whose very nature breeds despair and betrayal. The same tendency toward betrayal prevents those who are imprisoned here from working to- gether for long toward the common goal of escape. Adventures on Carceri might explore the forces--- spiritual and psychological as well as physical and outright demonic---that keep characters trapped or imprisoned there. Characters might help a prisoner escape, from an unjustly held spirit to some primeval god banished to oblivion here. DEMIPLANES Demiplanes are extradimensional spaces that come into being by a variety of means and boast their own physical laws. Some are created by spells. Others are natural folds of reality pinched off from the rest of the multiverse. Theoretically, a Plane Shift spell can carry travelers to a demiplane, but the proper frequency required for the tuning fork can be extremely hard to acquire. The Gate spell is more reliable, assuming the caster knows of the demiplane. A demiplane can be as small as a single chamber or large enough to contain an entire realm. For example, a Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion spell creates a demiplane consisting of a foyer with multi- ple adjoining rooms, while the land of Barovia exists entirely within a demiplane under the sway of its vampire lord, Strahd von Zarovich. When a demi- plane is connected to the Material Plane or some other plane, entering the demiplane can be as simple as moving through a portal or passing through a wall of mist. # Demiplane Adventures Demiplanes are limited realities shaped according to the will of whoever created them. Adventures in demiplanes might let characters explore how they would shape reality to suit their desires and ideals, or confront distortions of reality crafted by villains. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY # 187 188 `\eeeeeene`{=tex}® # Aarakocra Scouts Return Home To = A CITY ON THE PLANE OF AiR. 7 # Elemental Plane Of Air The Plane of Air is home to constant winds of vary- ing strength, Here and there, chunks of earth drift in the openness, many covered with lush vegetation. These earth motes serve as homes for djinn and other natives of the plane. Other creatures live on cloud banks infused with magic to become solid surfaces, supporting towns and castles. Drifting clouds can obscure visibility in any di- rection in the plane. Storms are frequent, ranging from strong thunderstorms to fierce tornadoes or mighty hurricanes. The air is mild, except near the Para-elemental Planes at either end of the plane, where the temperature is more extreme. Rain and snow fall only in the part of the plane nearest to the Para-elemental Plane of Ice. Although few landmarks distinguish one area of the Plane of Air from any other, the following are notable features of the plane: Aaqa. Here and there are hidden realms reachable only by following a particular sequence of flowing winds. Fabled Aaqa is one such realm, a shining domain of silver spires and verdant gardens atop a fertile earth mote. The Wind Dukes of Aaga are dedicated to law and good, and they main- tain a vigilant watch against the depredations of Elemental Evil. They are served by aarakocra. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY Labyrinth Winds. Much of the Plane of Air is a complex web of air streams, currents, and winds called the Labyrinth Winds. These range from stiff breezes to howling gales that can rip a crea- ture apart. Even the most skilled flying creatures must navigate these currents carefully, flying with the winds, not against them. Mistral Reach. Located near the Para-elemental Plane of Ice, the Mistral Reach is a region of frigid winds and driving snowstorms. Earth motes in the reach are covered with snow and ice. Sirocco Straits. The Sirocco Straits is the region of the plane nearest to the Para-elemental Plane of Ash, where hot, dry winds scour earth motes into barren chunks of rock. # Plane Of Air Adventures The essential nature of air is movement, animation, and inspiration. Air is the breath of life, the winds of change, the fresh breeze that clears away the fog of ignorance and the stuffiness of old ideas. When turned toward wicked ideals by cultists of Elemental Evil, elemental air represents destructive power turned to vengeful ends. Cultists of Evil Air wield howling storms to forcefully express their personal freedom or lay claim to things they feel they have been wrongfully denied. ELEMENTAL PLANE OF EARTH The Plane of Earth is a chain of mountains rising higher than any mountain range on the Material Plane. It has no sun of its own, and no air surrounds the peaks of its highest mountains. Most visitors to the plane arrive by way of vast caverns that honey- comb the mountains. Important features of the Plane of Earth include the following: City of Jewels. The plane's largest cavern, called the Great Dismal Delve or the Sevenfold Mazework, is home to the City of Jewels---the capital city of the dao. The dao take great pride in their wealth and send teams across the plane in search of new veins of ore and gemstones. Thanks to these ex- peditions, every building and significant object in the city is made from precious stones and metals, including the slender gemstone-inlaid spires that top most buildings. The city is protected by a powerful spell that alerts the entire population if a visitor steals even a single stone. Furnaces. The Furnaces are the mountains nearest the Para-elemental Plane of Magma. Lava seeps through their caverns, and the air reeks of sulfur. The dao have great forges and smelting furnaces here to process ores and shape precious metals. Mud Hills. The Mud Hills abut the swampy Para-elemental Plane of Ooze. Landslides wear away the slopes of the hills, sending cascades of earth and stone into the bottomless swamp. The Plane of Earth constantly regenerates the land, pushing new hills up as the old ones erode to nothing. # Plane Of Earth Adventures Earth symbolizes stability, rigidity, stern resolve, and tradition. The plane's position opposite the Plane of Air in the ring of the Elemental Planes reflects its opposition to almost everything air represents. Elemental Evil views earth instead as an implaca- ble force of destruction, perfectly willing to crush venerable institutions and respected traditions in its advance. Cultists of Evil Earth crave the power to destroy the works of civilization with landslides, sinkholes, or mighty earthquakes, and they believe the earth thirsts for the blood of those who don't venerate it properly. # Elemental Plane Of Fire A blazing sun hangs at the zenith of a golden sky above the Plane of Fire, waxing and waning on a 24-hour cycle. It ranges from white hot at noon to deep red at midnight, so the darkest hours of the plane display a deep-red twilight. At noon, the light is intense. Most business in the City of Brass (see below) takes place during the darker hours. The weather on the plane is marked by fierce winds and thick ash. Although the air is breathable, creatures not native to the plane must cover their mouths and eyes to avoid stinging cinders. The efreet use magic to keep the cinder storms away from the City of Brass, but elsewhere in the plane, the wind always blows, sometimes rising to hurri- cane force during the worst storms. The heat on the Plane of Fire is comparable to a hot desert on the Material Plane and poses a similar threat to travelers (see "Environmental Effects" in chapter 3). Sources of water are rare, so travelers must carry their own supplies or produce water by magic. Important features of the Plane of Fire include the following: Cinder Wastes. The Plane of Fire is dominated by a great expanse of black cinders and embers crossed by rivers of lava. Roving bands of salamanders battle each other, raid azer outposts, and avoid patrols from the City of Brass. Obsidian ruins dot the desert---remnants of forgotten civilizations. City of Brass. Perhaps the best-known location on the Inner Planes is the City of Brass, which stands on the shores of the Sea of Fire. This is the fabled city of the efreet, and its ornate spires and spiked walls reflect the efreet's grandiose and cruel nature. True to the nature of the Plane of Fire, everything in the city seems alive with dancing flames, reflecting the vibrant energy of the place. The heart of the city is the formidable Charcoal Palace, where the tyrannical emperor of the efreet reigns supreme, surrounded by nobles and a host of servants, guardians, and sycophants. Sea of Fire. Lava flows through the Fountains of Creation toward the Para-elemental Plane of Ash and pools into a great expanse of lava called the Sea of Fire, traversed by efreeti and azer sailors in great brass ships. Islands of obsidian and basalt jut up from the sea, dotted with ancient ruins and the lairs of powerful red dragons. Torchy's. Built atop a tall basalt crag in the middle of a lava river is an iron-walled tavern that is most easily reached by hot-air balloon. The proprietor is a sentient Flame Tongue (Mace) named Torchy, who sells a fine ale and seems to have a new wielder every few months. Torchy's is a popular hangout for ballooning enthusiasts. # Elemental Fire Adventures Fire represents vibrancy, passion, and change. At its best, fire reflects the light of inspiration, the warmth of compassion, and the flame of desire. The cults of Elemental Evil represent fire at its worst: cruel and wantonly destructive. Cult- ists of Evil Fire seek the power to burn away the impurities of the world with volcanic eruptions, # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 189 Tre City of Brass is A HUB FOR # Trade From Across The Multiverse uncontrolled wildfires, heat waves, and droughts, transforming the Material Plane into a mirror of the Cinder Wastes. Adventurers frequently come to the City of Brass on quests for legendary magic. If it's possible to buy magic items in your campaign, the City of Brass is the most likely place to find any item for sale. The efreet are fond of trading in favors, especially when they have the upper hand in negotiations. Perhaps a magical contagion or poison can be cured only with something that must be purchased in the markets of the city. # Elemental Plane Of Water The Plane of Water is an endless sea, called the Sea of Worlds, dotted with atolls and islands that rise up from enormous coral reefs that seem to stretch forever into the depths. The storms that move across the sea sometimes create temporary portals to the Material Plane and draw ships into the Plane of Water. Surviving vessels from countless worlds and navies ply these waters with little hope of ever returning home. A warm sun arcs across the sky of the Plane of Water, seeming to rise and set from within the water at the horizon. Several times a day, the sky # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY clouds over and releases a deluge of rain, often accompanied by spectacular shows of lightning, be- fore clearing up again. At night, a glittering array of stars and auroras bedecks the sky. The weather on the plane is a lesson in extremes. If the sea isn't calm, it is battered by storms. On rare occasions, a tremor in the planar firmament sends a rogue wave sweeping across the plane, swamping entire islands and driving ships down to the reefs. Any land that rises above the surface of the sea is hotly contested by the few air breathers that live on the plane. Fleets of rafts and ships lashed together serve as solid ground where nothing else is available, although most natives of the plane never break the surface of the sea and thus ignore these habitations. The following are among the most important fea- tures of the Plane of Water: Citadel of Ten Thousand Pearls. The nominal emperor of the marids dwells in the Citadel of Ten Thousand Pearls, an opulent palace made of coral and studded with pearls. The palace is the glit- tering centerpiece of the Sea of Light (see below). Visitors are welcome to ask favors of the emperor, whose mood is as changeable as the sea. Darkened Depths. The deeper extents of the plane, where no sunlight reaches, are called the Dark- ened Depths. Horrid creatures dwell here, and the absolute cold and crushing pressure mean a swift end to creatures accustomed to the surface or the Sea of Light. Krakens and other mighty leviathans claim this realm. Isle of Dread. One of the few islands on the plane is the Isle of Dread, which is connected to the Material Plane by means of a storm that regularly sweeps over the island. Ships from different worlds of the Material Plane end up wrecked on the rocks and reefs around the island, and settle- ments across the island are populated by the de- scendants of sailors who never found a way home. Theoretically, travelers who understand the work ings of the storm could use it to travel to a desired Material Plane world. Sea of Ice. Bordering the Para-elemental Plane of Ice is the Sea of Ice. The frigid water is choked with icebergs and sheet ice, which are inhabited by cold-loving creatures from the Plane of Ice. Drifting icebergs can carry these creatures far- ther into the Plane of Water to threaten ships and islands in warmer seas. Sea of Light. Life flourishes in the sunlit waters of the Sea of Light, located in the upper reaches of the Sea of Worlds. Aquatic peoples craft castles and fortresses in the coral reefs here. Silt Flats. The region of the Plane of Water nearest to the Para-elemental Plane of Ooze is called the Silt Flats. The water is thick with soil and sludge, turning into muddy ground before giving way to the great swamp that is the Para-elemental Plane. # Elemental Water Adventures The nature of water is to flow, not like the gust- ing wind or the leaping flame, but smoothly and steadily. It is the rhythm of the tide, the nectar of life, the bitter tears of mourning, and the balm of sympathy and healing. Given time, it can erode all in its path. Elemental Evil emphasizes the erosive power of water, as well as the destruction wrought by surg- ing tides, deadly maelstroms, and raging torrents. Cultists of Evil Water believe the seas and deep waters are eager to reclaim the water trapped in the bodies of living creatures, and think it's their duty to return others to the primal waters by drowning them or shedding their blood. ELYSIUM Elysium is home to creatures of unfettered kind- ness and a refuge for planar travelers seeking a safe haven. The plane's bucolic landscapes glimmer with life and beauty. The River Oceanus originates in the lowest layer of Elysium, Thalasia, and flows through the plane's layers before cascading onward to the Beastlands. Though illustrations of the plane's layers seem to show the river flowing "up" from each layer to the one "above" it, the experience of passing from one layer to another on the river is no more dramatic than weathering rapids on any ordinary river. Along its course, the great river splits into myriad smaller flows, recombines, and splits again. LAYERS OF ELysium Layer Description Amoria Small towns on the banks of the River Oceanus, surrounded by lush mead- ows, are among the most hospitable refuges on the Outer Planes. Steep hills, craggy mountains, and white granite valleys offer a rugged home for hardy souls. Lighthouses pierce the fog and form hubs for small communities amid sprawling marshlands. The Heroic Isles, rising from the head- waters of the River Oceanus, hold the best departed souls. Eronia Belierin Thalasia # Elysium Adventures Tranquility and contentment seep into the bones and souls of those who enter Elysium. The longer a visitor remains on the plane, the less reason they find to ever leave. An adventure in Elysium can challenge characters' devotion to doing good by offering them the opportunity (or the temptation) to rest from their labors and enjoy a well-earned reward. Belierin is said to be the prison of some deadly creature. Some tales say it's a powerful titan, per- haps the tarrasque, while others claim it's a deposed duke of the Nine Hells, a banished elemental prince, or even a near-dead deity. Evil creatures sometimes lurk in the marshes, seeking to free the prisoner or claim some power from it. Characters might also venture to Elysium to seek out some ancient spirit on the Heroic Isles. When faced with the once-a-millennium task of forestall- ing a prophesied disaster, characters might consult with the valorous knight who accomplished the deed a thousand years ago. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 191 `\y`{=tex}- ETHEREAL PLANE The Ethereal Plane is a misty, fogbound dimension. Its "shores," called the Border Ethereal, overlap the Material Plane, the Feywild, the Shadowfell, and the Inner Planes, and every location on those planes has a corresponding location on the Ethereal Plane. Vis- ibility in the Border Ethereal is usually limited to 60 feet. The plane's depths comprise a region of swirl- ing mist and fog called the Deep Ethereal, where visibility is usually limited to 30 feet. Characters can use the Etherealness spell to enter the Border Ethereal. The Plane Shift spell allows transport to the Border Ethereal or the Deep Ethe- real, but unless the intended destination is a specific location or a teleportation circle, the point of arrival could be anywhere on the plane. # Border Ethereal From the Border Ethereal, a traveler can see into whatever plane it overlaps, but that plane appears grayish and indistinct, its colors blurring into each other and its edges turning fuzzy, limiting visibility to 30 feet into the other plane. Conversely, the Ethereal Plane is usually imperceptible to those on the overlapped planes, except with the aid of magic. Tre Raoianr Ciradet is A # Refuge Plane, # To A Raging Ether # N The Ethereal Ite Its Proximity CYCLONE Normally, creatures in the Border Ethereal can't attack creatures on the overlapped plane, and vice versa. A traveler on the Ethereal Plane is impercep- tible to someone on the overlapped plane, and solid objects on the overlapped plane don't hamper the movement of a creature in the Border Ethereal. The exceptions are certain magical effects (including anything made of magical force) and living beings. This makes the Ethereal Plane ideal for scouting, spying on opponents, and moving around without being detected. The Ethereal Plane also disobeys the laws of gravity; a creature there can freely move in any direction. DEEP ETHEREAL To reach the Deep Ethereal, one typically needs a Plane Shift spell, a Gate spell, or a magical portal. Visitors to the Deep Ethereal are engulfed by roiling mist. Scattered throughout the plane are curtains of vaporous color, and passing through a curtain leads a traveler to a region of the Border Ethereal connected to a specific Inner Plane, the Material Plane, the Feywild, or the Shadowfell. The color of the curtain indicates the plane whose Border Ethe- real the curtain conceals; see the Ethereal Curtains table. The curtains are also distinguishable by texture and temperature, each one reflecting something of the nature of the plane beyond. # Ethereal Curtains 1d12 Plane Curtain Color 1-2 Material Plane Turquoise 3 Shadowfell Dusky gray 4 Feywild\_ Opalescent 5 Elemental Plane of Air Pale blue 6 Elemental Plane of Earth Chestnut 7 Elemental Plane of Fire Orange 8 Elemental Plane of Water Green 9 Para-elemental Plane ofAsh Dark gray 10 Para-elemental Plane of ce © Aquamarine 1\] Para-elemental Plane of Maroon Magma 12 Para-elemental Plane of Ooze Chocolate Traveling through the Deep Ethereal is unlike physical travel. Distance is meaningless, so although travelers feel as if they can move by a simple act of will, it's impossible to measure speed and hard to track the passage of time. A trip through the Deep Ethereal takes 1d10 « 10 hours from one curtain to another, regardless of the origin and destination. In combat, creatures move at their normal speeds. # Ether Cyclones An ether cyclone is a serpentine column that spins through the plane. The cyclone appears abruptly, distorting and uprooting everything in its path and carrying the debris for miles. Travelers with a Passive Perception score of 15 or higher receive I minute of warning: a deep thrum in the ethereal matter. Travelers who can't reach a curtain or por- tal leading elsewhere suffer the cyclone's effect. Roll 1420 and consult the Ether Cyclone table to deter- mine the effect on all creatures in the vicinity. ETHER CYCLONE 1420' Effect 1-12 Extended journey. Each character in a group traveling together makes a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. If at least half the group succeeds, travel is delayed by 1d10 hours. Oth- erwise, the journey's travel time is doubled. 13-19 Blown to a location in the Border Ethereal overlapping a random plane (roll on the Ethereal Curtains table) 20 ---\_Hurled to a random destination on the Astral Plane' # Radiant Citadel Against the unending mist and unseen terrors of the Ethereal Plane, the Radiant Citadel stands bright as a bastion of hope. It's a living relic of the ae ingenuity and collaboration of twenty-seven great civilizations on the Material Plane. Abandoned and lost for ages, the Radiant Citadel was resurrected from its slumber and reclaimed by descendants of those societies. The Radiant Citadel is a nexus of diplomacy and trade, a repository of histories and secrets, and a thriving sanctuary for those seeking safety or a bet- ter life. The floating city is a miracle of architecture carved out of a single, massive fossil that snakes around a colossal gemstone shard known as the Auroral Diamond. The luminescence of the Auroral Diamond is mirrored in the constellation of fifteen structure-sized gemstones, the Concord Jewels, that orbit the city and provide transportation to the far-flung homes of the city's founding civilizations. In the haze of the Ethereal Plane, the Auroral Di- amond is a scintillating beacon visible from miles away. The diamond seems to have moods, changing colors unpredictably, but it is always visible for wanderers lost and in need. Just beyond the city whirls a massive ether cyclone known as the Keening Gloom---a looming threat that's a grim reminder of the Radiant Citadel's precarious position. Heroes and paupers meet on equal footing in the Radiant Citadel. By common agreement, power and resources are equitably shared. Dignity is afforded to all, and great need is met with great aid. ETHEREAL PLANE ADVENTURES Adventurers typically use the Ethereal Plane to travel from one place to another, either skirting around Material Plane obstacles on the Border Ethereal or venturing into the Deep Ethereal to travel to the Inner Planes. The Radiant Citadel can serve as a home base for any campaign built around the idea of exploring new worlds. Several such worlds are introduced in Journeys through the Radiant Citadel, an anthology of short adventures. Ss WHEN THE DRAGON'S TEAR COMET APPEARS ABOVE Firestorm Peak, tHe Vast GATE # Forms A BRIOGE TO THE Far Ream # Far Realm The Far Realm is outside the known multiverse. In fact, it might be an entirely separate universe with its own physical and magical laws. Where stray en- ergies from the Far Realm leak onto another plane, matter is warped into alien shapes that defy under- standable geometry and biology. Aberrations such as mind flayers and beholders are either from this plane or shaped by its strange influence. The entities that abide in the Far Realm are too alien for mortal minds to accept without strain. Titanic creatures swim through nothingness there, and unspeakable beings whisper awful truths to those who dare listen. For mortals, knowledge of the Far Realm is a struggle of the mind to over- come the boundaries of matter, space, and rational thought. Some Warlocks embrace this struggle by forming pacts with entities there. Anyone who has seen the Far Realm mutters about eyes, tentacles, and horror. The Far Realm has no well-known portals, or at least none that are still viable. Ancient elves once opened a vast portal to the Far Realm within a mountain called Firestorm Peak, but their # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY a civilization imploded in bloody terror, and the portal's location---even its home world---is long for- gotten. Lost portals might still exist, marked by an alien magic that transforms the surrounding area. # Far Realm Adventures The Far Realm is the home of entities so far beyond comprehension that mortals can't fathom their mo- tivations. To see these beings is to become lost in their magnitude and the evidence that mortals have never, will never, and could never matter to the cos- mos at large. Adventures involving travel to the Far Realm or its influence seeping into the Material Plane might touch on fundamental questions of what it means to be a person, what mental and bodily autonomy mean and their value, and whether mortals have any control over their fate or any importance in the grand scheme of things. (It's an especially good idea to review your players' limits that might pertain to such issues before planning an adventure exploring these themes, as discussed in the "Ensuring Fun for All" section in chapter 1.) FEYWILD The Feywild, also called the Plane of Faerie, is a land of soft lights and wonder, a place of music and magic. The plane responds to unfettered emotion: flowers turn and tremble in the presence of a heated argument, grass withers under the feet of one who seethes with malice, and birds chip merrily in the presence of those who are joyous and squawk angrily at those who are dour. Time and distance in the Feywild are mutable, as is the plane's geography. Roads are uncommon, and the ones that exist change as frequently as the land around themselves. Feywild natives are accustomed to the plane's mutability, but it can be terribly dis- orienting to visitors. The Feywild exists in parallel to the Material Plane as an alternate dimension that occupies the same cosmological space. When moving from the Material Plane to the Feywild, travelers usually find themselves in a location similar to the one they left, but more marvelous and magical---and often more vibrant and colorful, too. Adventurers climbing a volcano on the Material Plane might suddenly find themselves scaling a Feywild mountain topped with skyscraper-sized crystals that glow with internal fire. Leaving behind a wide and muddy river on the Material Plane, characters might appear beside a clear and winding brook whose waters glitter like diamonds in the Feywild. In the heart of a dismal marsh might lie a portal leading to a vast bog filled with eerie lights and sinister shapes twisting in the water. And moving to the Feywild from old ruins on the Material Plane might put a traveler at the door of an archfey's castle. DoMAINS OF DELIGHT Much of the Feywild is governed by powerful Fey called archfey. The area under a particular archfey's command---called a Domain of Delight---reflects the character and desires of its ruler. Some domains are bright and cheery, bathed in perpetual sunlight and awash in colorful wildflowers, while others are gloomy and drab, cast in unending twilight. Most of them change with the emotional state of their rulers. The following sections describe a handful of the best-known Domains of Delight. Fablerise. The domain of a story-spinning spider archfey named Yarnspinner, Fablerise is a rambling thicket of twisted roots, thorny vines, and sinuous creepers. This vegetation weaves together to form long tunnels, grand hallways, and enormous domes. Yarnspinner loves reading stories to the animals that occupy his domain. Gloaming Court. The Queen of Air and Darkness rules the Gloaming Court, a realm of twilight, fire- flies, cobwebs, and autumn leaves accompanied by the music of hooting owls and croaking frogs. The Fey of the Gloaming Court shun the formalized etiquette and rituals of the Summer Court (see be- low), instead prizing behavior that is intuitive and instinctual. Prismeer. Prismeer is a large domain belonging to the archfey Zybilna. It encompasses a vast swamp called Hither; an ancient forest named Thither; and a stormy, mountainous landscape called Yon. Zybilna resides in the Palace of Heart's Desire, situated where the three portions of her realm meet. As its name suggests, the palace is fabled as a destination for anyone seeking their heart's desire. On some worlds, Zybilna is regarded as a fairy god- mother of sorts, granting wishes for the lost, the forsaken, or the betrayed. Sometimes her wishes bring happiness, other times despair. (Prismeer is detailed in The Wild Beyond the Witchlight.) Summer Court. Ruled by the archfey Queen Titania, the Summer Court is the most settled and pastoral domain in the Feywild. Wrapped in the warmth of a perpetual summer day, with fluttering butterflies and a riot of colorful flowers, the lands of the Summer Court mimic the trappings of courtly life in some realms of the Material Plane. The resi- dents of this court wear elegant clothing and value elaborate ceremony and ritualized etiquette, and the Fey are quick to shun those who flout the Summer Court's baroque rules. Fey CROSSINGS Fey crossings are places of mystery and beauty on the Material Plane that have a near-perfect mirror in the Feywild, creating a portal where the two planes touch. A traveler passes through a fey crossing by entering a clearing, wading into a pool, passing into a circle of mushrooms, or crawling un- der the trunk of a tree. To the traveler, it seems like simply moving into the Feywild. To an observer, the traveler is there one moment and gone the next. \| Like other portals between planes, most fey crossings open infrequently. A crossing might open only during a full moon, on the dawn of a particu- lar day, or for someone carrying a certain type of item. A fey crossing can be closed permanently if the land on either side is dramatically altered---for; example, if a castle is built over the clearing on the! Material Plane. FEYWILD MAGIC Tales speak of children kidnapped by Fey creatures j and spirited away to the Feywild, only to return to their parents years later without having aged a day and with no memories of their captors or the realm they came from. Likewise, adventurers who return from an excursion to the Feywild are often alarmed to discover upon their return that time # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 195 flows differently on the Plane of Faerie and that the memories of their visit are hazy. You can use these optional rules to reflect the strange magic that suf- fuses the plane. Memory Loss. A creature that leaves the Feywild makes a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. Fey creatures automatically succeed on the saving throw, as do creatures that have the Fey Ancestry trait, such as elves. On a failed save, the creature remembers nothing from its time spent in the Feywild. Ona successful save, the creature's memories remain intact but are a little hazy. Any spell that can end a curse can restore the creature's lost memories. Time Warp. While time seems to pass normally in the Feywild, characters might spend a day there and realize, upon leaving the plane, that less or more time has elapsed everywhere else in the multiverse. Whenever a creature or group of creatures leaves the Feywild after spending at least 1 day on that plane, you can choose a time change that works best for your campaign, if any, or roll on the Fey- wild Time Warp table. A Wish spell can be used to remove the effect on up to ten creatures. Some powerful Fey have the ability to grant such wishes and might do so if the beneficiaries agree to subject themselves to a Geas spell and complete a quest after the Wish spell is cast. FEYWILD Time Warp 1d20 \~---- Result 1-2 Days become minutes 3-6 Days become hours 7-13 Nochange 14-17. Days become weeks 18-19 Days become months 20 Days become years # Feywild Adventures The Feywild gives physical expression to powerful emotion and excels at metaphor. When characters venture into the Feywild, they might find them- selves robbed of a cherished memory or deep regret, then later find the stolen memories embodied in lit- tle figurines or lockets. A mischievous sprite might sneak up behind a character who is laughing loudly and steal their laughter, robbing the character of the ability to laugh until the sprite is found and the laughter---perhaps taking physical form as a bouquet of lovely flowers---reclaimed. Fey REVEL IN THE GLOAMING CourrT UNDER THE WATCHFUL EYE OF THE Y QUEEN OF Air AND Darkness / GEHENNA HADES A volcanic mountain dominates each of the four layers of Gehenna, and lesser volcanic earthbergs drift in the air and smash into the greater moun- tains. The rocky slopes of the plane make movement difficult and dangerous. The ground inclines at least 45 degrees almost everywhere. In places, steep cliffs and deep canyons present more challenging obstacles. Hazards include volcanic fissures that vent noxious fumes or searing flames. Gehenna is the birthplace of yugoloths, greedy and selfish Fiends that dwell here in great numbers. Layers OF GEHENNA Layer Description Khalas Lava illuminates clouds of volcanic ash and steam from the River Styx. Constant lava flows and eruptions make overland travel difficult. Iron zeppelins piloted by yugoloths drift through the constant gray ashfall. Acidic ash mingles with falling snow on this freezing layer. The Dead Furnace is a great mountain suspended in silence and darkness, home to a coterie of liches. Chamada Mungoth Krangath # Gehenna Adventures Gehenna is the plane of suspicion and greed, with no space for mercy or compassion. Adventures on this plane might be an opportunity to explore themes of betrayal, examining how characters be- have when tensions run high and they can trust no one---perhaps not even each other. (See "Environ- mental Effects" in chapter 3 for one way this atmo- sphere can manifest.) Characters might encounter people in need who turn out to be yugoloths in disguise, pitting the characters' growing suspicion against their empathy and compassion. Characters might make their way to the Teardrop Palace on Khalas to purchase something they can't find elsewhere, probably at a terrifying cost. This bustling market, crowded with Fiends and occa- sional mortal visitors, offers all manner of forbidden and sinister goods for sale. Its name comes from its shape: the point is on the palace's uphill side so it diverts the ever-present lava flow to either side of the structure. Or characters could try to infiltrate the Tower Arcane in search of some great secret from yugo- loths' ancient history. The tower, a sinister struc- ture adorned with blades and spikes and guarded by arcanaloths, stands somewhere on Chamada. It is rumored to hold yugoloths' history and the records of their contracts. The layers of Hades are called the Three Glooms--- places without joy, hope, or passion. A gray land with an ashen sky, Hades is the destination of many souls that are unclaimed by gods or Fiends. These souls become larvae and spend eternity in this place, which lacks a sun, a moon, stars, or seasons. Leaching away color and emotion, the gloom on this plane is more than most visitors can stand. LayYers OF HADES Layer Description Oinos A land of dead-gray ash, stunted trees, and virulent disease is stalked by rov- ing bands of Fiends looking for a fight or recruits for the Blood War. Gray pine trees blanket rolling hills and rocky bluffs, and thick mists coil around their trunks. Shriveled willows, olive trees, and poplars contribute to the gloom of this concentration of the deepest despair in the multiverse. Niflheim Pluton # Plane Of Gloom At the end of each Long Rest taken on the plane, a visitor makes a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature gains 1 Exhaustion level that can't be removed while the creature is in Ha- des. If the creature reaches 6 Exhaustion levels, it doesn't die. Instead, it permanently transforms into a Larva, whereupon all Exhaustion levels afflicting the creature are removed. # Hades Adventures Hades embodies despair manifested as apathy. Pure, undiluted evil is like an inescapable force of gravity, dragging all creatures down---not in body, but in spirit. Even the consuming rage of the Abyss and the devious plotting of the Nine Hells are subju- gated to hopelessness in the Gray Wastes of Hades. The plane slowly kills dreams and desires, draining hope and optimism from formerly fiery spirits. An adventure in Hades can challenge characters to find an answer to the ever-present question that hangs over this plane: why bother? As apathetic despair saturates their hearts and spirits, they must find a way to rekindle the passion of life and the sense of purpose that drives them or else succumb to the hopelessness of the plane. Adventurers might pursue a hag, a lich, or another evil spellcaster who comes to Hades to collect lar- vae for vile purposes. Once they are in the Three Glooms, the adventurers risk becoming trapped by the overwhelming despair of the place.