# Example Contagions The following examples show how magical conta- gions can work. Feel free to alter the saving throw DCs, effects, and other characteristics of these con- tagions to suit your campaign. CACKLE FEVER Magical Contagion Cheaply made potions and elixirs are sometimes tainted by Cackle Fever, which affects Humanoids only (gnomes are strangely immune). A creature suffers the following effects 1d4 days after infection: Fever. The creature gains 1 Exhaustion level, which lasts until the contagion ends on the creature. Uncontrollable Laughter. While the creature has the Exhaustion condition, the creature makes a DC 13 Constitution saving throw each time it takes damage other than Psychic damage. On a failed save, the creature takes 5 (1d10) Psychic damage and has the Incapacitated condition as it laughs uncontrollably. At the end of each of its turns, the creature repeats the save, ending the effect on itself on a success. After 1 minute, it suc- ceeds automatically. Fighting the Contagion. At the end of each Long Rest, an infected creature makes a DC 13 Constitu- tion saving throw. After the creature succeeds on three of these saves, the contagion ends on it, and the creature is immune to Cackle Fever for 1 year. Spreading the Contagion. Any Humanoid (other than a gnome) that starts its turn within a 10-foot Emanation originating from a creature infected with Cackle Fever must succeed on a DC 10 Consti- tution saving throw or also become infected with the contagion. On a successful save, the Humanoid can't catch the contagion from that particular in- fected creature for the next 24 hours. SEWER PLAGUE Magical Contagion Fouled potions and alchemical waste can give rise to Sewer Plague, which incubates in sewers and refuse heaps and is sometimes transmitted by creatures that dwell in such areas, including otyughs and rats. Any Humanoid that is wounded by a creature that carries the contagion or that comes into contact with contaminated filth or offal must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or become infected with Sewer Plague. A creature suffers the following effects 1d4 days after infection: Fatigue. The creature gains 1 Exhaustion level. Weakness. While the creature has any Exhaustion levels, it regains only half the normal number of Hit Points from spending Hit Point Dice. Restlessness. While the creature has any Exhaus- tion levels, finishing a Long Rest neither restores lost Hit Points nor reduces the creature's Exhaus- tion level. Fighting the Contagion. Daily at dawn, an infected creature makes a DC 11 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature gains 1 Exhaustion level as its fatigue worsens. On a successful save, the creature's Exhaustion level decreases by 1. If the creature's Exhaustion level is reduced to 0, the con- tagion ends on the creature. SicHT Rot Magical Contagion Any Beast or Humanoid that drinks water tainted by Sight Rot must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Blinded condition until the contagion ends. Fighting the Contagion. Magic such as a Heal or Lesser Restoration spell ends the contagion immedi- ately. A character who is proficient with an Herbal- ism Kit can use it to create one dose of nonmagical ointment, which takes 1 hour. When applied to the eyes of a creature suffering from Sight Rot, the oint- ment suppresses the contagion on that creature for 24 hours. If the contagion is suppressed in this way for a total of 72 hours (requiring three doses and applications of the ointment), the contagion ends on the creature. Spreading the Contagion. Any Humanoid that makes skin contact with a creature infected with Sight Rot must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or also become infected with the con- tagion. On a successful save, the Humanoid can't catch the contagion from that particular infected creature for the next 24 hours. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 61 DEATH Adventures involve risk, with consequences that can be as catastrophic as the death of a single char- acter or an entire group. Given the degree to which players get attached to their characters, character death can be an emotionally charged situation. It might even be a hard limit for some players (see "Ensuring Fun for All" in chapter 1), so it's worth having a conversation about how to handle charac- ter death at the start of a new game. DEATH MusT BE FAIR © The best way to avoid hard feelings connected to the death of a beloved character is to make sure the players know you're being fair. Keep these princi- ples in mind: Don't Cheat in the Monsters' Favor. Rolling dice in front of the players when a situation is especially deadly is one way to communicate that you're not cheating in the monsters' favor or singling out a single character for punishment. Don't Make It Personal. Don't punish a character for a player's behavior or some personal grudge. That's probably the quickest way to undermine your players' trust in you as DM and as a fair arbi- ter of the rules. # Sometimes Death---even The Death Of An Entire Party---is Just A # Passage To New Adventures Provide Fair Warning. Let characters face the con- sequences of their foolish actions, but make sure you give enough cues for the players to recognize self-destructive actions. You might want to ask a player, "Are you sure?" before committing a char- acter to a potentially fatal course of action. Fair Encounters. Your players have to know that you're fair in designing encounters. It's fine to throw tough encounters at them and sometimes to let them face monsters they can't beat. But it's not fair if the players have no way to know they can't win the fight or have no way to escape. # Scaling Lethality You can adjust the lethality of your campaign using the encounter-building guidelines in chapter 4. If your players enjoy games that test their charac- ters to the utmost and are prepared to create new characters at a moment's notice, consider using high-difficulty encounters over and over, with little opportunity for rests between encounters, to create a more lethal adventure. Conversely, using only low-difficulty encounters is less likely to lead to character death, especially if characters have ample opportunity to rest during the adventure. Pe DEFEATED, NoT DEAD If you and your players agree to avoid character death in your game, you might consider an alterna- tive: a character who would otherwise die is instead "defeated." The following rules apply to a defeated character. Comatose. The character has 1 Hit Point and the Unconscious condition. The character can regain Hit Points as normal, but the character remains Unconscious until they are targeted by a Greater Restoration spell or experience a sudden awakening (see below). Sudden Awakening. After finishing a Long Rest, the character makes a DC 20 Constitution saving throw. On a successful save, the Unconscious condition ends on the character, On a failed save, the condition persists. # Death Scenes When a character is reduced to O Hit Points, the player sometimes has to sit out one or more rounds of combat with nothing to do but roll Death Saving Throws. One way to keep a player involved in the game is to prompt some roleplaying along with each Death Save. You might ask the player to describe a memory that surfaces in the character's mind while hovering near death. Consider these possibilities: On a Successful Death Save. A memory that inspires hope and courage. A beloved person who would urge the character to cling to life. A thought of something to live for. A favorite child- hood memory. On a Failed Death Save. A memory that stirs up shame or grief. A beloved person who is already dead, beckoning the character to join them. An experience of weariness or despair. You can also reward a player who describes a mem- ory or something else occupying the dying charac- ter's thoughts with Advantage on the Death Save. When a character dies, either from failed Death Saves or from an effect that kills the character out- right, consider giving the player some ownership over the character's final moments by asking what the character's last words are or how the character greets death. # Dealing With Death When a character dies, consult with the players to decide what happens next. Some players are per- fectly happy to make new characters, especially when they're eager to try out new options. A new party member should start at the same level as the other characters in the party and have gear of sim- ilar value. It's also possible for dead characters to be brought back to life. The most common way is through spells such as Revivify and Raise Dead. It's up to you to decide how easy it is for characters to access those spells if they can't cast them. The Player's Handbook offers suggested prices for spellcasting services. WHAT IF EVERYONE DIES? Misadventure can wipe out an entire group. (You'll sometimes hear players refer to this as a "total party kill" or "TPK.") Such a catastrophe doesn't have to end the whole game---rather, it presents an opportu- nity to take the game in a new direction. Consider these possibilities. # A Fresh Start Everyone makes new characters, and the campaign starts anew. This might be the most drastic option, but it allows for new stories and fresh character dynamics. # Divine Council The characters find themselves before a council of deities who are arguing about the characters' fate. The characters must convince the council to return them to life. # Escape From The Underworld The dead characters wake up in Hades (see chapter 6) and must find a way to escape the grim under- world and return to the world of the living. IMPRISONED The characters wake up in cells, kept alive and im- prisoned by their foes for some purpose. # Raised By Another A powerful individual finds the adventurers' bodies and has them raised from the dead, putting the ad- venturers in the debt of their rescuer. What if the adventurers wake up decades after their death, re- turned to life by a Resurrection spell cast by someone who believed they had an important role to play in this future era? # Rescue Mission The players create new, temporary characters who are tasked with retrieving the bodies of the fallen heroes, so they can be raised from the dead or given proper burials. If the dead characters have Bastions (see chapter 8), the stand-in party could consist of hirelings from those Bastions. se CHAPTER\|DM'STOOLBOX 63 Doors Adventurers interact with doors often ina D&D campaign. This section gives rules for most of the doors the adventurers encounter. COMMON Doors The Doors table provides the AC and Hit Points for common doors, which are Medium objects. With the Utilize action, a creature can try to force open a door that is barred or locked, doing so with a successful Strength (Athletics) check. The table provides the DC of the check. For bigger doors, double or triple the Hit Points and increase the DC of the check by 5. Doors Door AC HP DC to Open Glass door 13 4 10 Metal door 19 72 25 Stone door 7 40 20 Wooden door 15 18 15 BARRED Door A barred door has no lock. A creature on the barred side of the door can take the Utilize action to lift the bar from its braces, allowing the door to be opened. LocKeD Door Characters who don't have the key to a locked door can try to pick the lock using Thieves' Tools. The Lock Complexity table tells you how long it takes to try to pick a lock based on its complexity. At the end of that time, the character picks the lock by making a successful Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check using Thieves' Tools. The DC is determined by the lock''s quality, as shown in the Lock Quality table. Lock COMPLEXITY Lock QUALITY Complexity Time Quality DC to Unlock Simple 1 action Inferior 10 Complex Tminute Good 5 Superior 20 SECRET Doors A secret door is crafted to blend into the wall that surrounds it. Sometimes faint cracks in the wall or scuff marks on the floor betray the secret door's presence, Other than the fact that it's hidden, a secret door is similar to a common door. With the Search action, a character can search for a secret door along a 10-foot-square section of wall and make a Wisdom (Perception) check. On # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX ------, hee ee ee a successful check, the character finds any secret door hidden in that section of wall as well as the mechanism to open the door. The DC of the check depends on how well the secret door is hidden, as shown in the Secret Doors table. You can instead call for an Intelligence (Investiga- tion) check if the challenge involves deducing that a door is present from noticeable clues, rather than spotting those clues in the first place. See "Perception" in chapter 2 for more advice. Secret Doors Secret Door DC to Detect Barely hidden secret door 10 Standard secret door 15 Well-hidden secret door 20 Secret Door ETIQUETTE Adventurers often fail to locate secret doors. For this reason, don't hide important treasures or loca- tions behind secret doors unless you're comfortable with the characters not finding them, and don't risk letting your adventure grind to a halt because the only path forward is hidden behind a secret door. PORTCULLISES Typically made of iron or wood, a portcullis blocks a passage or an archway until it is raised into the ceiling by a winch and chain. Creatures within 5 feet of a lowered portcullis can make ranged attacks or cast spells through it, and they have Three-Quarters Cover against attacks, spells, and other effects originating from the opposite side. A portcullis can also be attacked and destroyed, using the AC and Hit Points of a metal door (if iron) or a wooden door (if wood). Winching a portcullis up or down requires the Utilize action. If a creature can't reach the winch (usually because it's on the other side of the portcul- lis), lifting the portcullis requires the Utilize action and a successful Strength (Athletics) check. The DC of the check depends on the type of portcullis, as shown in the Portcullises table. PORTCULLISES Portcullis Size lron DC + Wood DC Medium (8 ft. tall x 5 ft. wide) 20 15 Large (10 ft. tall x 10 ft. wide) 25 20 Huge (20 ft. tall x 15 ft. wide) 30 25 DUNGEONS Some dungeons are old strongholds abandoned by the folk who built them. Others are natural caves or lairs carved out by monsters. Dungeons attract cults, groups of monsters, and reclusive creatures. Because of their varied origins and purposes, dun- geons have a range of distinctive qualities. For example, a dungeon that serves as a stronghold for hobgoblin soldiers has a different mood and features than an ancient temple inhabited by yuan-ti. You can use the Dungeon Quirks table to add dis- tinctive character to a dungeon you're creating or one in a published adventure. The quirks on the ta- ble reflect the characteristics of a dungeon's creator, its intended purpose, its location, or some (often catastrophic) event in its history. You can use a sin- gle quirk or combine quirks as you see fit, and roll or choose a result that inspires you. DUNGEON Quirks 1d100 Quirk 01-02 Abandoned after internal strife devastated its population Abandoned because the site was cursed by a god or other powerful entity Abandoned by its original creators when a plague spread through the dungeon Amazingly well preserved ancient city in- side a dome encased in volcanic ash, sub- merged underwater, or entombed in desert sands Built as a fortress guarding a mountain pass Built as a maze, either to protect treasure from intruders or as a gauntlet where pris- oners were hunted by monsters Built as a stronghold but abandoned after it fell to invaders Built as a treasure vault to protect powerful magic items and great wealth Built atop a cloud Built beneath a city in catacombs or sewers Built beneath or on top of a mesa or several connected mesas Built by a religious group to serve as a tem- ple and linked to the energy of other planes of existence Built by dwarves and decorated with enor- mous dwarven faces that have been de- faced by its current inhabitants 03-04 05-06 07-09 10-12 13-15 # 16-18 19-21 22-23 24-26 27-29 30-32 33-35 36-38 Built in a volcano 1d100 39-40 41-43 44-46 # 47-49 50-52 53-55 56-58 # 59-61 62-64 65-66 # 67-69 70-72 73-75 76-78 79-8) 82-84 85-87 88-90 91-93 94-96 97-98 99-00 Quirk Built in or among the branches of a tree Built to house a planar portal but aban- doned when creatures or energy from the other side of the portal seeped into the dungeon Carved into a meteorite (before or after it fell to earth) Carved into a sheer cliff face Caverns carved by a beholder's disintegra- tion eye ray, with unnaturally smooth walls and vertical shafts connecting different levels Contains something that led to the downfall of its creators or inhabitants Dug as a burrow by a monster that might still live inside Entrance concealed behind a waterfall Floating on the sea Intended as a death trap to eliminate any creature that enters, perhaps to guard a treasure or to harvest souls for a necroman- tic rite Intended as a tomb Long known as the site of a great miracle or another auspicious event Made by amphibious creatures (such as kuo-toa or aboleths), using water to protect the innermost reaches from air-breathing intruders Made by a powerful spellcaster (perhaps a lich) as a site for magical research and experimentation Made by giants at a vast scale Natural caverns featuring a range of strik- ingly beautiful rock and crystal formations On an island in an underground sea On the back of a Gargantuan creature Originally constructed as a mine but aban- doned when tunnels connected to danger- ous Underdark tunnels Secreted away in a demiplane or in a pocket dimension Slowly abandoned as its creators died out or migrated away Transformed by multiple events or disasters over the course of centuries # CHAPTER\|DM'STOOLBOX 65: male ke 66 # A Dungeon Built By Giants # Offers Enormous Adventures # Mapping A Dungeon A dungeon can range in size from a few chambers to a huge complex of rooms and passages extending hundreds of feet. The adventurers' goal often lies as far from the dungeon entrance as possible, forcing characters to delve deeper underground or push farther into the heart of the complex. A dungeon is usually mapped on a grid like graph paper, with each square on the paper representing an area of 5 feet by 5 feet. Appendix B shows several examples. If you play with miniatures on a grid, this scale makes it easy to transfer a map to a battle grid. MAPPING PRINCIPLES As you draw or adapt a dungeon map, keep the following in mind. Asymmetry. Asymmetrical rooms and map layouts make a dungeon interesting and unpredictable. Three-Dimensional Layout. Stairs, ramps, lifts, platforms, ledges, balconies, pits, and other changes of elevation make a dungeon interesting and make combat encounters in those areas challenging. Multiple Pathways. Add multiple entrances and exits---to the dungeon as a whole and to individual rooms. By offering multiple paths the characters can follow, you present meaningful decision points to the players. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX Wear and Tear. If you'd like to show wear and tear caused by time or the elements, collapsed passages can be commonplace, cutting off formerly con- nected sections of the dungeon from each other. Past earthquakes might have opened chasms within a dungeon, splitting rooms and corridors to make interesting obstacles. Natural Features. Many dungeons include nat- ural features. An underground stream might run through the middle of a stronghold, causing varia- tion in the shapes and sizes of rooms and necessitat- ing features such as bridges and drains. Secrets. Add secret doors and secret rooms to re- ward players who take the time to search for them. For each door and room, consider their original purpose: were secret doors a defense against invad- ers, or do denizens of the dungeon scheme to keep secrets from each other? Secrets can help you de- velop the story of a dungeon. DESIGNING DUNGEON Rooms Keep the following things in mind when designing a dungeon room: Ceiling Support. Underground chambers are prone to collapse, so many rooms---particularly large ones---have arched ceilings or pillars to support the weight of the rock overhead. Decoration. Most sapient creatures decorate their lairs. Statues, bas-reliefs, murals, and mosaics of- ten adorn dungeon rooms. Equally common are scrawled messages, marks, and maps left behind by others who have passed through the area. Some of these marks are simply graffiti, while others may be useful to adventurers who examine them closely. Exits. Creatures that can't open doors can't make a lair in a sealed room without some sort of exter- nal assistance. Strong creatures without the abil- ity to open doors smash them down if necessary. Burrowing creatures might dig their own exits. Common dungeon rooms fall into the broad catego- ries described below. Crypts Although it sometimes resembles a vault, a crypt can also be a series of individual rooms, each with its own sarcophagus, or a long hall with recesses on either side to hold coffins or bodies. Crypt builders who are worried about undead rising from the grave lock and trap crypts from the outside---making the crypts easy to get into but difficult to exit. Other builders worried about tomb robbers make their crypts difficult to get into. Some builders make both entry and exit difficult, just to be safe. GUARD Posts Sapient, social denizens of the dungeon generally guard the entrances to their shared spaces. A guard post may just be a room with a table where bored sentries play a dice game, or it might be a pair of iron golems backed up by spellcasters hiding in bal- conies overhead. When you design a guard post, decide how many guards are on duty, note their Passive Perception scores, and decide what they do when they notice intruders (see "Monster Behavior" in chapter 4). Some will rush headlong into a fight, while others will negotiate, sound an alarm, or flee to get help. # Living Quarters Most creatures have a lair where they can rest, eat, and store their treasure. Living quarters commonly include beds (if the creatures sleep), possessions (both valuable and mundane), and some sort of food preparation area (anything from a well-stocked kitchen to a firepit to a hunk of rotting meat). # Natural Subterranean Areas Built dungeons often intersect with natural caverns, grottoes, and passages that are home to subterra- nean creatures, strange rock formations, pools of water, molds, fungi, and bioluminescent moss. SHRINES Any sapient creature might have some place ded- icated to worship. Depending on the creature's resources and piety, such a shrine can be humble or extensive. Adventurers are likely to encounter priests, cultists, and similar creatures there, and wounded monsters might flee to a shrine to seek healing. VAULTS A vault contains treasure and is usually sealed behind a locked or secret door. Many vaults are further protected by magic, monsters that can sur- vive without food and water, and traps (see "Traps" in this chapter). WoRK AREAS Sapient creatures often have laboratories, work- shops, libraries, forges, and studios. Because such areas tend to contain valuable equipment, their doors are often locked and sometimes even warded by Glyph of Warding spells and similar effects. # Dungeon Decay The States of Ruin table can help you determine the general conditions of a dungeon area. STATES OF RUIN 1d6 Features 1 Perilous. The area is dangerously worn and prone to collapse. Any impacts or damage to the structure, including from spells and other areas of effect, have a 50 percent chance of causing a collapse. 2 Crumbling. Areas within the dungeon section are choked with rubble and have a 50 percent chance of being Difficult Terrain. Half Cover and hiding places are plentiful. 3. Neglected. One dungeon hazard---such as brown mold, green slime, or yellow mold (see "Hazards" in this chapter)---is abundant. 4 Abandoned. Most of the dungeon is de- serted. Dexterity (Stealth) checks have Dis- advantage because any sounds stand out as unusual. 5 Secure. Ability checks made to break down doors, open locks, or carry out similar activi- ties have Disadvantage. 6 Thriving. The dungeon is heavily populated. Any loud noises draw the attention of nearby creatures, # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 67. 68 # A Frienoly Bronze Oragon # Environmental Effects Characters crossing a frigid tundra might suffer the effects of extreme cold, while a visit to a cloud gi- ant's castle might subject characters to the effects of high altitude. The following sections provide rules for handling these and other environmental effects. DEAD MaAGIc ZONE A dead magic zone is an area where the fabric of magic is torn. The effect is the same as the Antimagic Field spell, except that it is permanent and typically covers an area no more than 300 feet in diameter. # Deep Water Swimming through deep water (more than 100 feet deep) presents additional challenges because of the water's pressure and cold temperature. After each hour of swimming in deep water, a creature that lacks a Swim Speed must succeed on a DC 10 Con- stitution saving throw or gain 1 Exhaustion level. # Extreme Cold When the temperature is 0 degrees Fahrenheit or lower, a creature exposed to the extreme cold must succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw at # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX the end of each hour or gain \| Exhaustion level. Creatures that have Resistance or Immunity to Cold damage automatically succeed on the save. # Extreme Heat When the temperature is 100 degrees Fahrenheit or higher, a creature exposed to the extreme heat and without access to drinkable water must succeed on a Constitution saving throw at the end of each hour or gain 1 Exhaustion level. The DC is 5 for the first hour and increases by 1 for each additional hour. Creatures wearing Medium or Heavy armor have Disadvantage on the save. Creatures that have Re- sistance or Immunity to Fire damage automatically succeed on the save. FRIGID WATER = A creature can be immersed in frigid water for a number of minutes equal to its Constitution score before suffering any ill effects. Each additional min- ute spent in frigid water requires the creature to succeed on a DC 10 Constitution saving throw or gain \| Exhaustion level. Creatures with Resistance or Immunity to Cold damage automatically suc- ceed on the save, as do creatures that are naturally adapted to living in ice-cold water. HEAVY PRECIPITATION Everything within an area of heavy rain or heavy snowfall is Lightly Obscured, and creatures in the area have Disadvantage on all Wisdom (Perception) checks. Heavy rain also extinguishes open flames. HicH ALTITUDE Traveling at altitudes of 10,000 feet or higher above sea level is taxing for most creatures because of the reduced amount of oxygen in the air. Each hour such a creature spends traveling at high altitude counts as 2 hours for the purpose of determining how long that creature can travel (see "Travel Pace" in chapter 2). Creatures can become acclimated to a high alti- tude by spending 30 days or more at this elevation. Creatures can't become acclimated to elevations above 20,000 feet unless they are native to such environments. # Planar Effects Certain planes of existence---and areas on the Ma- terial Plane affected by them---have supernatural effects on creatures within them. Several examples are presented below. See chapter 6 for more infor- mation about the planes of existence. # Acheronian Bloodlust The plane of Acheron rewards a creature for harm- ing other creatures by imbuing it with the strength to keep fighting. While in Acheron or a region un- der its influence, a creature gains Temporary Hit Points equal to half its Hit Point maximum when- ever it reduces another creature to 0 Hit Points. # Arcadian Vitality On the plane of Arcadia and in regions where its influence is felt, creatures benefit from supernatural vitality, which grants them Immunity to the Fright- ened and Poisoned conditions. # Blessed Beneficence On the plane of Mount Celestia and in regions where its influence is felt, creatures are blessed by the pervasive beneficence of the plane. Creatures other than Fiends and Undead gain the benefit of the Bless spell as long as they remain in an area of blessed beneficence. In addition, such a creature that finishes a Long Rest in the area gains the bene- fit of a Lesser Restoration spell. # Gehennan Cruelty On the plane of Gehenna and in regions where its influence is felt, creatures are driven to loathe helping one another. Whenever a creature subject to Gehennan cruelty casts a spell that restores Hit Points or removes a condition other than Invisible, the caster must succeed on a DC 10 Charisma sav- ing throw, or the spell fails and is wasted. # Winds Of Pandemonium The winds of Pandemonium are common in Pan- demonium and regions where its influence is felt, including parts of the Underdark. A creature makes a DC 10 Wisdom saving throw after each hour spent among the howling winds. On a failed save, the creature gains 1 Exhaustion level. The winds can't increase a creature's Exhaustion level above 3. Finishing a Long Rest doesn't reduce a creature's Exhaustion level unless the creature can somehow escape the winds. # Slippery Ice Slippery ice is Difficult Terrain. A creature that moves onto slippery ice for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition. # Strong Wind Strong wind imposes Disadvantage on ranged at- tack rolls with weapons. It also extinguishes open flames and disperses fog. A flying creature in a strong wind must land at the end of its turn or fall. A strong wind in a desert can create a sandstorm that imposes Disadvantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks, # Thin Ice Thin ice has a weight tolerance of 3d10 « 10 pounds per 10-foot-square area, Whenever the total weight on an area of thin ice exceeds its tolerance, the ice in that area breaks. All creatures on broken ice fall through. Below the ice is frigid water (see "Frigid Water" above). WILD MaGIc ZONE A past magical disaster or uncontrolled surge of power in a particular place can cause the fabric of magic to unravel, creating a wild magic zone. In such an area, which is typically no more than 300 feet in diameter, magic behaves unpredictably. Whenever a creature expends a spell slot to cast a spell in a wild magic zone, roll 1d20. If you roll a 20 on the die, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table in the Player's Handbook to create a magical effect. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX = --- 70 # Fear And Mental Stress Due to the nature of their vocation, adventurers tend to be less susceptible to fear and mental stress than common folk. Whereas a farmer might flee in terror from a bear or an apparition, adventurers are made of sterner stuff. That said, certain creatures and game effects can terrify or fray the mind of even the most stalwart adventurer. If you plan to use any of these rules, discuss them with your players at the start of the campaign. See "Ensuring Fun for All" in chapter 1. # Fear Effects Whenever the characters encounter something that is supernaturally frightful, use the Frightened con- dition as the baseline effect. Fear effects typically require a Wisdom saving throw, with a save DC based on how terrifying the situation is. The Sample Fear DCs table provides some examples. SAMPLE Fear DCs Example Save DC When the characters open a sarcopha- 10 gus, a harmless yet terrifying apparition appears. A character triggers a magical trap that 15 creates an illusory manifestation of that character's worst fears, visible only to that character. A portal to the Abyss opens, revealing 20 a nightmarish realm of torment and slaughter, Typically, a Frightened creature repeats the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the ef- fect on itself on a success. At your discretion, a Frightened creature might be subject to other effects as long as the Frightened condition lasts. Consider these examples:: The Frightened creature must take the Dash ac- tion on each of its turns and uses its movement to get farther away from the source of its fear. - Attack rolls against the Frightened creature have Advantage. - The Frightened creature can do only one of the following on each of its turns: move, take an ac- tion, or take a Bonus Action. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX # Mental Stress Effects When a character is subjected to an effect that causes intense mental stress, Psychic damage is the best way to emulate that effect. The Sample Mental Stress Effects table provides a few examples of such effects, with suggested saving throw DCs and damage. Mental stress can usually be resisted with a successful Wisdom save, but sometimes an Intelligence or Charisma save is more appropriate. On a successful save, a character might take half as much damage instead of no damage, at your discretion, # Sample Mental Stress Effects Save Psychic Example DC Damage A character ingests a hallucino- 10 1d6 genic substance that distorts the character's perception of reality. A character touches a fiendish idol 15 3d6 that tears at the character's mind, threatening to shatter it. A magical trap flings a character 20 9d6 into the Far Realm until the end of that character's next turn. PROLONGED EFFECTS Exposure to mental stress can cause prolonged effects. Consider the following possibilities. Short-Term Effects. The character has the Fright- ened, Incapacitated, or Stunned condition for 1d10 minutes. This condition might be accompanied by alarming behavior or hallucinations. These effects can be suppressed with the Calm Emotions spell or removed by the Lesser Restoration spell. Long-Term Effects. The character has Disadvan- tage on some or all ability checks for 1d10 « 10 hours, stemming from an unwillingness or inability to exert a particular set of abilities. The character might feel enervated and unable to exert much Strength, for example, or become so suspicious of others that Charisma checks are more difficult. These effects can be suppressed with the Calm Emo- tions spell or removed by the Lesser Restoration spell. Indefinite Effects. An indefinite effect is a long- term effect (see above) that lasts until removed by a Greater Restoration spell. It can be suppressed by a Calm Emotions spell. FiGkt, FLIGHT, oR Freeze? # When Faced With A Troll, There's # No Time To Figure Out The Right # Way To Hold A Shotgun Sh aes é S ai # Firearms And Explosives Renaissance-era pistols and muskets appear in the Player's Handbook. In a campaign involving a crashed spaceship or elements of modern-day Earth, characters might find the items described here. FIREARMS The Firearms table provides examples of modern and futuristic firearms. If you make them available for purchase (perhaps in the fantastical market- places of the City of Brass), treat modern items as Rare magic items and futuristic items as Very Rare ones (see chapter 7). PROPERTIES Some weapons in the Firearms table have the following properties, in addition to properties described in the Player's Handbook. Burst Fire. As an action, you can expend 10 pieces of a Burst Fire weapon's ammunition to spray shots in a 10-foot Cube within the weapon's normal range. Each creature in that area must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take damage. Roll the weapon's damage once, and apply it to each creature that failed the save. Reload. You can make a limited number of shots with a Reload weapon. You must then reload the weapon as an action or a Bonus Action. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX ae AMMUNITION Firearm Bullets are destroyed upon use in a modern firearm. Futuristic firearms use Energy Cells that become depleted but could possibly be recharged with the proper equipment, at your discretion. An Energy Cell weighs 1/2 lb. EXPLOSIVES The Explosives table has examples of explosives. If no cost is given for an explosive, it can't typically be bought. If you make these explosives available for purchase, treat them as Rare magic items. Rules for explosives are given below. BOMB As an action, you can light a Bomb and throw it at a point up to 60 feet away, where it explodes. Each creature in a 5-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point makes a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 3d6 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. # Dynamite Stick An an action, you can light a Dynamite Stick and throw it at a point up to 60 feet away, where it ex- plodes. Each creature in a 5-foot-radius Sphere cen- tered on that point makes a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 3d6 Force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. FIREARMS Modern Item Damage Properties Mastery Weight Martial Ranged Weapons Automatic Rifle 2d8 Piercing © Ammunition (Range 80/240; Bullet), Burst Fire, \| Slow 8 Ib. Reload (30 shots), Two-Handed Hunting Rifle 2d10 Piercing Ammunition (Range 80/240; Bullet), Slow 8 Ib. Reload (5 shots), Two-Handed Revolver 2d8 Piercing = Ammunition (Range 40/120; Bullet), Sap 3 Ib. Reload (6 shots) Semiautomatic Pistol 2d6 Piercing \| Ammunition (Range 50/150; Bullet), Vex 3 Ib. Reload (15 shots) Shotgun 2d8 Piercing = Ammunition (Range 30/90; Bullet), Push 7 Ib. Reload (2 shots), Two-Handed Futuristic Item Damage Properties Mastery Weight Martial Ranged Weapons Antimatter Rifle 6d8 Necrotic Ammunition (Range 120/360; Energy Cell), Sap 10 Ib. Reload (2 shots), Two-Handed Laser Pistol 3d6 Radiant Ammunition (Range 40/120; Energy Cell), Vex 2 Ib. Reload (50 shots) Laser Rifle 3d8 Radiant © Ammunition (Range 100/300; Energy Cell), Slow 7 Ib. Reload (30 shots), Two-Handed It takes 1 minute to bind two or more Dynamite EXPLOSIVES Sticks together so they explode at the same time. Item Cost Weight Each stick after the first increases the damage by Bomb 100 GP 1b 1d6 (to a maximum of 10d6) and the effect's radius ' by 5 feet (to a maximum of 20 feet). Dynamite Stick = 1 Ib. It takes 1 minute to rig dynamite with a longer Grenade, Fragmentation a 1b. fuse so it explodes after a longer period of time, F 4 Grenade Launcher ---\_ 7 Ib. such as \| minute or 10 minutes. Grenade, Smoke 50 GP 2 Ib. GRENADES AND GRENADE LAUNCHERS Gunpowder (kan) 250GP 20 \|b. As an action, you can either throw a grenade at a point up to 60 feet away or use a Grenade Launcher Gunpowder (powder horn) 35 GP 2 Ib. to propel the grenade to a point up to 1,000 feet away. The grenade explodes at that point, creating a particular effect in a 20-foot-radius Sphere. Fragmentation Grenade. Each creature in the Sphere makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, tak- ing 17 (Sd6) Piercing damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Smoke Grenade. The area of the Sphere is Heavily Obscured by smoke for 1 minute. A strong wind (such as the Gust of Wind spell) disperses the smoke. GUNPOWDER Setting fire to a container full of Gunpowder causes it to explode. When a container explodes, each creature in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on the container makes a DC 12 Dexterity saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) Fire damage (for a powder horn) or 24 (7d6) Fire damage (for a keg) on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. # Alien Technology When adventurers find a piece of technology that isn't from their world or time period, they can deduce what it is with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check, with the DC depending on the complexity of the item: DC 10 for a relatively simple item like a calculator or a lighter, or DC 20 for a complex item such as a computer, a chainsaw, or a hovercraft. You may require a separate Intelli- gence (Investigation) check to determine whether a character can activate or operate the technology; a character who has observed the item in use or has operated a similar item either has Advantage on the check or succeeds on the check automatically (your choice).