# CHAPTER \| TREASURE Meum of TELEPATHY Heim oF ComMPREMENDING LANGuAGEs Fireball (fire opal), Prismatic Spray (diamond), or Wall of Fire (ruby). The gem is destroyed when the spell is cast and disappears from the helm. Taking Fire Damage. Roll 1420 if you are wearing the helm and take Fire damage as a result of failing a saving throw against a spell. On a roll of 1, the helm emits beams of light from its remaining gems and is then destroyed. Each creature within a 60- foot Emanation originating from you must succeed on a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw or be struck by a beam, taking Radiant damage equal to the number of gems in the helm. HELM OF COMPREHENDING LANGUAGES Wondrous Item, Uncommon While wearing this helm, you can cast Comprehend Languages from it. HELM OF TELEPATHY Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this helm, you have telepathy with a range of 30 feet, and you can cast Detect Thoughts or Suggestion (save DC 13) from the helm. Once either spell is cast from the helm, that spell can't be cast from it again until the next dawn. # Helm Of Teleportation Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) This helm has 3 charges. While wearing it, you can expend \| charge to cast Teleport from it. The helm regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. Meio ofr TELEPORTATION HEWARD'S HANDY HAVERSACK Wondrous Item, Rare This backpack has a central pouch and two side pouches, each of which is an extradimensional space. Each side pouch can hold up to 200 pounds of material, not exceeding a volume of 25 cubic feet. The central pouch can hold up to 500 pounds of material, not exceeding a volume of 64 cubic feet. The haversack always weighs 5 pounds, regardless of its contents. Retrieving an item from the haversack requires a Utilize action or a Bonus Action (your choice). When you reach into the haversack for a specific item, the item is always magically on top. If any of its pouches is overloaded, pierced, or torn, the haversack ruptures and is destroyed. If the haversack is destroyed, its contents are lost forever, although an Artifact always turns up again somewhere. If the haversack is turned inside out, its con- tents spill forth unharmed, and the haversack must be put right before it can be used again. Each pouch of the haversack holds enough air for 10 minutes of breathing, divided by the number of breathing creatures inside. Placing the haversack inside an extradimensional space created by a Bag of Holding, Portable Hole, or similar item instantly destroys both items and opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate originates where the one item was placed inside the other. Any creature within 10 feet of the gate and not behind Total Cover is sucked through it and deposited in a random location on the Astral Plane. The gate then closes. The gate is one-way only and can't be reopened. Mewaro's Nanoy Haversack Mov AVENGER (Greatsworo) HeEwarp's HANpy SPICE PoucH Wondrous Item, Common This belt pouch appears empty and has 10 charges. While holding the pouch, you can take a Magic ac- tion to expend 1 charge, name any nonmagical food seasoning (such as salt, pepper, saffron, or cilantro), and remove a pinch of the desired seasoning from the pouch. A pinch is enough to season a single meal. The pouch regains 1d6 + 4 expended charges daily at dawn. Hoty AVENGER Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Paladin) You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. When you hit a Fiend or an Undead with it, that creature takes an extra 2d10 Radiant damage. While you hold the drawn weapon, it creates a 10-foot Emanation originating from you. You and all creatures Friendly to you in the Emanation have Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. If you have 17 or more levels in the Paladin class, the size of the Emanation in- creases to 30 feet. CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 269 270 HORN OF BLASTING Wondrous Item, Rare You can take a Magic action to blow the horn, which emits a thunderous blast in a 30-foot Cone that is audible out to 600 feet. Each creature in the Cone makes a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 5d8 Thunder damage and has the Deafened condition for 1 minute. Ona successful save, a creature takes half as much dam- age only. Glass or crystal objects in the Cone that aren't being worn or carried take 10d8 Thunder damage. Each use of the horn's magic has a 20 percent chance of causing the horn to explode. The ex- plosion deals 10d6 Force damage to the user and destroys the horn. HORN OF SILENT ALARM Wondrous Item, Common This horn has 4 charges and regains ld4 expended charges daily at dawn. As a Magic action, you can blow the horn while expending 1 charge. One crea- ture of your choice hears the horn's blare, provided that creature is within 600 feet of the horn. No other creature hears the horn. HORN OF VALHALLA Wondrous Item, Rare (Silver or Brass), Very Rare (Bronze), or Legendary (Iron) You can take a Magic action to blow this horn. In response, warrior spirits from the plane of Ysgard appear in unoccupied spaces within 60 feet of you. Each spirit uses the Berserker stat block and re- turns to Ysgard after 1 hour or when it drops to 0 Hit Points. The spirits look like living, breathing warriors, and they have Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened conditions. Once you use the horn, it can't be used again until 7 days have passed. Four types of Horn of Valhalla are known to ex- ist, each made of a different metal. The horn's type determines how many spirits it summons, as well as the requirement for its use. The DM chooses the horn''s type or determines it randomly by rolling on the following table. If you blow the horn without meeting its require- ment, the summoned spirits attack you. If you meet the requirement, they are Friendly to you and your allies and follow your commands. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 1d100 HornType Spirits Requirement 01-40 Silver 2 None 41-75 Brass 3 Proficiency with all Simple weapons 76-90 Bronze 2 Training with all Medium armor 91-00 lron 5 Proficiency with all Martial weapons HORSESHOES OF A ZEPHYR Wondrous Item, Very Rare These horseshoes come in a set of four. As a Magic action, you can touch one of the horseshoes to the hoof of a horse or similar creature, whereupon the horseshoe affixes itself to the hoof. Removing a horseshoe also takes a Magic action. While all four shoes are affixed to the hooves of a horse or similar creature, they allow the creature to move normally while floating 4 inches above a surface. This effect means the creature can cross or stand above nonsolid or unstable surfaces, such as water or lava. The creature leaves no tracks and ignores Difficult Terrain. In addition, the creature can travel for up to 12 hours a day without gaining Exhaustion levels from extended travel. HORSESHOES OF SPEED Wondrous Item, Rare These horseshoes come in a set of four. As a Magic action, you can touch one of the horseshoes to the hoof of a horse or similar creature, whereupon the horseshoe affixes itself to the hoof. Removing a horseshoe also takes a Magic action. While all four horseshoes are attached to the same creature, its Speed is increased by 30 feet. IMMOVABLE ROD Rod, Uncommon This iron rod has a button on one end. You can take a Utilize action to press the button, which causes the rod to become magically fixed in place. Until you or another creature takes a Utilize action to push the button again, the rod doesn't move, even if it defies gravity. The rod can hold up to 8,000 pounds of weight. More weight causes the rod to deactivate and fall. A creature can take a Utilize action to make a DC 30 Strength (Athletics) check, moving the fixed rod up to 10 feet on a successful check. IMMOVABLE Horn oF VALHALLA Norn or BiastinG INSTRUMENT OF ILLUSIONS Wondrous Item, Common While you are playing this musical instrument, you can take a Magic action to create harmless, illusory visual effects within a 5-foot Emanation originating from the instrument. If you are a Bard, the size of the Emanation increases to 15 feet. Sample visual effects include luminous musical notes, a spectral dancer, butterflies, and gently falling snow. The magical effects have neither substance nor sound, and they are obviously illusory. The effects end ---\</ when you stop playing. Af INSTRUMENT OF SCRIBING\ Wondrous Item, Common \~ \| This musical instrument has 3 charges and regains all expended charges daily at dawn. While you are INSTRUMENT OF Itiusions Ma ve playing it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge and write a magical message on a nonmagi- \| cal object or surface that you can see within 30 feet =) of yourself. The message can be up to six words long and is written in a language you know. If you are a Bard, you can scribe an additional seven words and make the message glow faintly, allowing it to be seen in nonmagical Darkness. Casting the Dispel Magic spell on the message erases it. Otherwise, the message fades away after 24 hours. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 271 ------*----- --- ---* # Instrument Of The Bards Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement by a Bard) An Instrument of the Bards is superior to an ordinary instrument in every way. Seven types of these in- struments exist, each named after a Bard college. The Instruments of the Bards table lists the spells common to all instruments, as well as the spells specific to each one and its rarity. A creature that attempts to play the instrument without being at- tuned to it must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or take 2d4 Psychic damage. You can play the instrument to cast one of its spells. Once the instrument has been used to cast a spell, it can't be used to cast that spell again until the next dawn. The spells use your spellcasting ability and spell save DC. Cui tyre Canaito MANDOLIN INSTRUMENTS OF THE Barbs Instrument Rarity Spells ANsTRUTH Ovtamn Mare Mare All \_--- Fly, Invisibility, Levitate, Protection from Evil and Good, plus the spells listed for the particular instrument Anstruth harp Very Rare Cure Wounds (level 5), Ice Storm, Wall of Thorns Canaith Rare Cure Wounds (level mandolin 3), Dispel Magic, Pro- tection from Energy (Lightning damage Mac-Furrmion only) cirreas Cli lyre Rare Stone Shape, Wall of Fire, Wind Wall Doss lute Uncommon Animal Friendship, Protection from Energy (Fire damage only), Protection from Poison FocHiucan Banoore Fochlucan Uncommon Entangle, Faerie Fire, bandore Shillelagh, Speak with Doss Lure:: Animals Mac-Fuirmidh Uncommon Barkskin, Cure Wounds, cittern Fog Cloud Ollamh harp ---\_ Legendary Confusion, Control Weather, Fire Storm } CHAPTER7 \| TREASURE IOUN STONE Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement) Roughly marble sized, Joun Stones are named after loun, a god of knowledge and prophecy revered on some worlds. Many types of oun Stones exist, each type a distinct combination of shape and color. When you take a Magic action to toss an Joun Stone into the air, the stone orbits your head at a distance of 1d3 feet, conferring its benefit to you while doing so. You can have up to three Joun Stones orbiting your head at the same time. Each Joun Stone orbiting your head is considered to be an object you are wearing. The orbiting stone avoids contact with other creatures and objects, ad- justing its orbit to avoid collisions and thwarting all attempts by other creatures to attack or snatch it. As a Utilize action, you can seize and stow any number of Joun Stones orbiting your head. If your Attunement to an Joun Stone ends while it's orbit- ing your head, the stone falls as though you had dropped it. The type of stone determines its rarity and effects. Absorption (Very Rare). While this pale lavender ellipsoid orbits your head, you can take a Reaction to cancel a spell of level 4 or lower cast by a crea- ture you can see. A canceled spell has no effect, and any resources used to cast it are wasted. Once the stone has canceled 20 levels of spells, it burns out, turns dull gray, and loses its magic. Agility (Very Rare). Your Dexterity increases by 2, to a maximum of 20, while this deep-red sphere orbits your head. Awareness (Rare). While this dark-blue rhomboid orbits your head, you have Advantage on Initiative rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks. Fortitude (Very Rare). Your Constitution increases by 2, to a maximum of 20, while this pink rhomboid orbits your head. Greater Absorption (Legendary). While this mar- bled lavender and green ellipsoid orbits your head, you can take a Reaction to cancel a spell of level 8 or lower cast by a creature you can see. A canceled Ioun Srones spell has no effect, and any resources used to cast it are wasted. Once the stone has canceled 20 lev- els of spells, it burns out, turns dull gray, and loses its magic. Insight (Very Rare). Your Wisdom increases by 2, to a maximum of 20, while this incandescent blue sphere orbits your head. Intellect (Very Rare). Your Intelligence increases by 2, toa maximum of 20, while this marbled scar- let and blue sphere orbits your head. Leadership (Very Rare). Your Charisma increases by 2, toa maximum of 20, while this marbled pink and green sphere orbits your head. Mastery (Legendary). Your Proficiency Bonus in- creases by 1 while this pale green prism orbits your head, Protection (Rare). You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class while this dusty-rose prism orbits your head. Regeneration (Legendary). You regain 15 Hit Points at the end of each hour this pearly white spindle orbits your head if you have at least 1 Hit Point. Reserve (Rare). This vibrant purple prism stores spells cast into it, holding them until you use them. The stone can store up to 4 levels of spells at a time. When found, it contains 1d4 levels of stored spells chosen by the DM. Any creature can cast a spell of level 1 through 4 into the stone by touching it as the spell is cast. The spell has no effect, other than to be stored in the stone. If the stone can't hold the spell, the spell is ex- pended without effect. The level of the slot used to cast the spell determines how much space it uses. While this stone orbits your head, you can cast any spell stored in it. The spell uses the slot level, spell save DC, spell attack bonus, and spellcasting ability of the original caster but is otherwise treated as if you cast the spell. The spell cast from the stone is no longer stored in it, freeing up space. Strength (Very Rare). Your Strength increases by 2, to a maximum of 20, while this pale blue rhom- boid orbits your head. Sustenance (Rare). You don't need to eat or drink while this clear spindle orbits your head. CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 273 # I 274 Iron Banos oF ff Bicarro # Uavelin Of Lightning IRON BANDS OF BILARRO Wondrous Item, Rare This rusty iron sphere measures 3 inches in diame- ter and weighs 1 pound. You can take a Magic action to throw the sphere at a Huge or smaller creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself. As the sphere moves through the air, it opens into a tangle of metal bands. Make a ranged attack roll with an attack bonus equal to your Dexterity modifier plus your Pro- ficiency Bonus. On a hit, the target has the Restrained condition until you take a Bonus Action to issue a command that releases it. Doing so or miss- ing with the attack causes the bands to contract and become a sphere once more. A creature that can touch the bands, including the one Restrained, can take an action to make a DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check to break the iron bands. On a successful check, the item is destroyed, and the Restrained creature is freed. On a failed check, any further attempts made by that creature automati- cally fail until 24 hours have elapsed. Once the bands are used, they can't be used again until the next dawn. IRON FLASK Wondrous Item, Legendary While holding this brass-stoppered iron flask, you can take a Magic action to target a creature that you can see within 60 feet of yourself. If the flask is empty and the target is native to a plane of exis- tence other than the one you're on, the target must succeed on a DC 17 Wisdom saving throw or be trapped in the flask. If the target has been trapped by the flask before, it has Advantage on the save. Once trapped, a creature remains in the flask until released. The flask can hold only one creature at a time. A creature trapped in the flask doesn't age and doesn't need to breathe, eat, or drink. You can take a Magic action to remove the flask's stopper and release the creature in the flask. The # CHAPTER \| TREASURE IRON Fiasx creature then obeys your commands for 1 hour, understanding those commands even if it doesn't know the language in which the commands are given. If you issue no commands or give the crea- ture a command that is likely to result in its death or imprisonment, it defends itself but otherwise takes no actions. At the end of the duration, the creature acts in accordance with its normal disposi- tion and alignment. An Identify spell reveals if the flask contains a creature, but the only way to determine the type of creature is to open the flask. A newly discovered Iron Flask might already contain a creature chosen by the DM or determined randomly by rolling on the following table (see the Monster Manual for the creature's stat block). 1d100 Contents 01-50 No creature 1d100 Contents 76-77 Invisible Stalker 51 Arcanaloth 78-79 Marid 52-54 Bone Devil 80 = Marilith 55-56 Cambion 81-82 Mezzoloth 57-58 Dao 83-84 Nalfeshnee 59 Deva 85-86 Night Hag 60-61 Djinni 87-88 Nycaloth 62-63 Efreeti 89 ------ Planetar 64-65 Erinyes 90-91 Red Slaad 66-67 Fomorian 92-93 Salamander 68 Githyanki Knight 94 Solar 69 Githzerai Zerth 95 Succubus 70-71 Glabrezu 96 ---\_Ultroloth 72-74 Hezrou 97-99 Vrock 75 Incubus 00 = Xorn Keoowrom's Ointment Luck Brace (Swortsworo) JAVELIN OF LIGHTNING Weapon (Javelin), Uncommon Each time you make an attack roll with this magic weapon and hit, you can have it deal Lightning dam- age instead of Piercing damage. Lightning Bolt. When you throw this weapon at a target no farther than 120 feet from you, you can forgo making a ranged attack roll and instead turn the weapon into a bolt of lightning. This bolt forms a 5-foot-wide Line between you and the target. The target and each other creature in the Line (exclud- ing you) makes a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 4d6 Lightning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Immediately after dealing this damage, the weapon reappears in your hand. This property can't be used again until the next dawn. KEOGHTOM'S OINTMENT Wondrous Item, Uncommon This glass jar, 3 inches in diameter, contains 1d4 +1 doses of a thick mixture that smells faintly of aloe. The jar and its contents weigh 1/2 pound. As a Utilize action, you can swallow one dose of the ointment or apply it to a creature within 5 feet of yourself. The creature that receives it regains 2d8 + 2 Hit Points and ceases to have the Poisoned condition. LANTERN OF REVEALING Wondrous Item, Uncommon While lit, this hooded lantern burns for 6 hours on 1 pint of oil, shedding Bright Light in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet. Invisible creatures and objects are visible as long as they are in the lantern's Bright Light. You can take a Utilize action to lower the hood, reducing the lantern's light to Dim Light in a 5-foot radius. # Lantern Of Revealing Lock OF TRICKERY Wondrous Item, Common This lock appears to be an ordinary Lock (of the type described in chapter 6 of the Player's Handbook) and comes with a single key. The tumblers in this lock magically adjust to thwart burglars. Dexterity checks made to pick the lock have Disadvantage. Luck BLADE Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, Sickle, or Shortsword), Legendary (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. While the weapon is on your person, you also gain a +1 bonus to saving throws. Luck, If the weapon is on your person, you can call on its luck (no action required) to reroll one failed D20 Test if you don't have the Incapacitated condi- tion. You must use the second roll. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. Wish. The weapon has 1d3 charges. While holding it, you can expend \| charge and cast Wish from it. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. The weapon loses this property if it has no charges. LUTE OF THUNDEROUS THUMPING Weapon (Club), Very Rare This reinforced lute can be wielded as a magic Club that deals an extra 2d8 Thunder damage on a hit. Sing and Swing. If you're a Bard, you can use your Charisma modifier instead of your Strength modi- fier when making a melee attack roll with the lute, provided you sing or hum while making the attack. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 275 MACE OF DISRUPTION Weapon (Mace), Rare (Requires Attunement) When you hit a Fiend or an Undead with this magic weapon, that creature takes an extra 2d6 Radiant damage. If the target has 25 Hit Points or fewer after taking this damage, it must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or be destroyed. On a suc- cessful save, the creature has the Frightened condi- tion until the end of your next turn. Light. While you hold this weapon, it sheds Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi- tional 20 feet. MACE OF SMITING Weapon (Mace), Rare You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. The bonus in- creases to +3 when you use the weapon to attack a Construct. When you roll a 20 on an attack roll made with this weapon, the target takes an extra 7 Bludgeon- ing damage, or 14 Bludgeoning damage if it's a Construct. If a Construct has 25 Hit Points or fewer after taking this damage, it is destroyed. Mace oF SMiTING Mace or Terror # CHAPTER \| TREASURE MACE OF TERROR Weapon (Mace). Rare (Requires Attunement) This magic weapon has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the weapon, you can take a Magic action and expend 1 charge to release a wave of terror from it. Each creature of your choice within 30 feet of you must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition for 1 minute. While Fright- ened in this way, a creature must spend its turns trying to move as far away from you as it can, and it can't make Opportunity Attacks. For its action, it can use only the Dash action or try to escape from an effect that prevents it from moving. If it has no- where it can move, the creature can take the Dodge action. At the end of each of its turns, a creature repeats the save, ending the effect on itself on a success. MANTLE OF SPELL RESISTANCE Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) You have Advantage on saving throws against spells while you wear this cloak. Mace or Disrurrion ManTLe OF SPELL Resistance MANUAL OF BopiILy HEALTH Wondrous Item, Very Rare This book contains health and nutrition tips, and its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's contents and practicing its guidelines, your Constitution increases by 2, to a maximum of 30. The manual then loses its magic but regains it in a century. MANUAL OF GAINFUL EXERCISE Wondrous Item, Very Rare This book describes fitness exercises, and its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's con- tents and practicing its guidelines, your Strength increases by 2, to a maximum of 30, The manual then loses its magic but regains it in a century. Manvatr or GoLems Manvat or Gorems (Iron) Manuat oF Govems (Stone) MANUAL OF GOLEMS Wondrous Item, Very Rare This tome contains information and incantations necessary to make a particular type of golem. The DM chooses the type or determines it randomly by rolling on the accompanying table. To decipher and use the manual, you must be a spellcaster with at least two level 5 spell slots. A creature that can't use a Manual of Golems and attempts to read it takes 6d6 Psychic damage. To create a golem, you must spend the time shown on the table, working without interruption with the manual at hand and resting no more than 8 hours per day. You must also pay the specified cost to pur- chase supplies. Once you finish creating the golem, the book is consumed in eldritch flames. The golem becomes animate when the ashes of the manual are sprinkled on it. See the Monster Manual for the golem's stat block. The golem is under your control, and it un- derstands and obeys your commands. 1d20 Golem Time Cost 1-5 ClayGolem 30 days 65,000 GP 6-17 FleshGolem 60 days 50,000 GP 18 = Iron Golem 120 days 100,000 GP 19-20 StoneGolem 90 days 80,000 GP Manuat oF ® Gorems (Fresn) # Manual Of # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Booty Hearn 277 278 # Medallion Of Manuat or Quickness oF ACTION THOUGHTS MANUAL OF QUICKNESS OF ACTION Wondrous Item, Very Rare This book contains coordination and balance exercises, and its words are charged with magic. If you spend 48 hours over a period of 6 days or fewer studying the book's contents and practicing its guidelines, your Dexterity increases by 2, toa maximum of 30. The manual then loses its magic but regains it in a century. MARINER'S ARMOR Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Uncommon While wearing this armor, you have a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. In addition, if you start your turn underwater with O Hit Points, you immedi- ately regain 1d4 Hit Points. The armor can't heal anyone again until the next dawn. The armor is decorated with fish and shell motifs. MEDALLION OF THOUGHTS Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) The medallion has 5 charges. While wearing it, you can expend \| charge to cast Detect Thoughts (save DC 13) from it. The medallion regains 1d4 expended charges daily at dawn. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Mirror or Lire TRAPPING Mariner's Armor (LEATHER Armor) MIRROR OF LIFE TRAPPING Wondrous Item, Very Rare When this 4-foot-tall, 2-foot-wide mirror is viewed indirectly, its surface shows faint images of crea- tures. The mirror weighs 50 pounds, and it has AC 11, HP 10, Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage, and Vulnerability to Bludgeoning damage. It shat- ters and is destroyed when reduced to O Hit Points. If the mirror is hanging on a vertical surface and you are within 5 feet of it, you can take a Magic action and use a command word to activate it. It remains activated until you take a Magic action and repeat the command word to deactivate it. Any creature other than you that sees its reflec- tion in the activated mirror while within 30 feet of the mirror must succeed on a DC 15 Charisma saving throw or be trapped, along with anything it is wearing or carrying, in one of the mirror's twelve extradimensional cells, A creature that knows the mirror's nature makes the save with Advantage, and Constructs succeed on the save automatically, An extradimensional cell is an infinite expanse filled with thick fog that reduces visibility to 10 feet. Creatures trapped in the mirror's cells don't age, and they don't need to eat, drink, or sleep. A creature trapped within a cell can escape using magic Moonscace (LONGsworo) that permits planar travel. Otherwise, the creature is confined to the cell until freed. If the mirror traps a creature but its twelve ex- tradimensional cells are already occupied, the mir- ror frees one trapped creature at random to accom- modate the new prisoner. A freed creature appears in an unoccupied space within sight of the mirror but facing away from it. If the mirror is shattered, all creatures it contains are freed and appear in un- occupied spaces near it. While within 5 feet of the mirror, you can take a Magic action to name one creature trapped in it or call out a particular cell by number. The creature named or contained in the named cell appears as an image on the mirror's surface. You and the creature can then communicate. In a similar way, you can take a Magic action and use a second command word to free one creature trapped in the mirror. The freed creature appears, along with its possessions, in the unoccupied space nearest to the mirror and facing away from it. Placing the mirror inside an extradimensional space created by a Bag of Holding, Portable Hole, or similar item instantly destroys both items and opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate originates where the one item was placed inside the other. Any crea- ture within 10 feet of the gate and not behind Total Cover is sucked through it to a random location on the Astral Plane. The gate then closes. The gate is one-way only and can't be reopened. MITHRAL ARMOR Armor (Any Medium or Heavy, Except Hide Armor), Uncommon Mithral is a light, flexible metal. Armor made of this substance can be worn under normal clothes. If the armor normally imposes Disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks or has a Strength requirement, the mithral version of the armor doesn't. MOONBLADE Weapon (Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Creature of the Weapon's Choice) Of all the magic items created by elves, one of the most prized and jealously guarded is a Moonblade. In ancient times, nearly all elven noble houses claimed one such weapon. Over the centuries, some of these weapons have faded from the world, their magic lost as family lines have become extinct. Others have vanished with their bearers during great quests. Thus, only a few of these weapons remain. Every Moonblade longs for a bearer whose dis- position and goals are compatible with its own. If you try to attune to a Moonblade that doesn't want you as its bearer, the weapon not only rejects you but also places a curse on you, causing you to make D20 Tests with Disadvantage for 24 hours or until the curse is ended by a Remove Curse spell or similar magic. If you're accepted by the weapon and try to attune to it, you become attuned to it instantly, and a new rune appears on it. You remain attuned to the weapon until you die or the weapon is destroyed. A Moonblade functions like a nonmagical weapon of its kind for anyone other than its chosen bearer. A Moonblade has one rune on it for each bearer it has willingly served (typically 1d6 + 1). The first rune grants a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage \| rolls made with this magic weapon. Each rune be- yond the first grants the Moonblade an additional property. The DM chooses each property or de- termines it randomly by rolling on the Moonblade Properties table. Minor Property. In addition to its aforementioned properties, each Moonblade has a minor property determined by rolling on the Magic Item's Minor \| Property table (see earlier in this chapter). Sentience. A Moonblade is a sentient weapon with an Intelligence of 12, a Wisdom of 10, and a Cha- risma of 12. It has hearing and Darkvision out to 120 feet. Its alignment matches that of its creator. The weapon communicates by transmitting emotions, sending a tingling sensation through the wielder's hand when it wants to communicate some. thing it has sensed. It can communicate through visions or dreams when the wielder is either in a trance or asleep. Personality. A Moonblade has a personality similar to that of its creator. Once a Moonblade has decided on an owner, it believes that only that person should wield it, even if the bearer's alignment differs from that of the weapon's or the bearer's goals later clash with the weapon's goals. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE MOONBLADE PROPERTIES 1d100 Property 01-60 Increase the weapon's bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls by 1, to a maximum of +3. Reroll if the Moonblade already has a +3 bonus. When you hit with an attack roll using the Moonblade, you deal an extra 1d6 Force damage. Each time the weapon gains this property after the first, the extra damage in- creases by 1d6, to a maximum of 3d6. Reroll if the Moonblade already deals an extra 3d6 Force damage on a hit. The Moonblade gains the Thrown property with a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. Each time you throw the weapon, it flies back to your hand after the attack. The Moonblade scores a Critical Hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20. You can take a Bonus Action to cause the Moonblade to flash brightly. Each other creature that is within 30 feet of you and not behind Total Cover must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Blinded condition for 1 minute. A creature repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a suc- cess. You can't use this property again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. The Moonblade has the properties of a Ring of Spell Storing. You can take a Magic action to conjure a spectral entity that resembles a shadowy elf if you don't already have one serving you. The entity appears in an unoccupied space within 120 feet of you. It uses the Shadow stat block with these changes: it is a Fey, has a Neutral alignment, and doesn't create new shadows. You control this entity, decid- ing how it acts and moves. It remains until it drops to 0 Hit Points or you dismiss it as a Magic action. Moon-Toucneo Sworo (Rapier) Moon-TOUCHED SworD Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Common In Darkness, the unsheathed blade of this weapon sheds moonlight, creating Bright Light in a 15-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 15 feet. in --- MYSTERY KEY Wondrous Item, Common A question mark is worked into the head of this key. The key has a S percent chance of unlocking any lock into which it's inserted. Once it unlocks some- thing, the key disappears. o ee NATURE'S MANTLE Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement by a Druid or Ranger) This cloak shifts color and texture to blend with the terrain surrounding you. While wearing the cloak, you can use it as a Spellcasting Focus for your Druid and Ranger spells. While you are in an area that is Lightly Obscured, you can Hide as a Bonus Action even if you are be- ing directly observed. --- NECKLACE OF ADAPTATION Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this necklace, you can breathe nor- mally in any environment, and you have Advantage on saving throws made to avoid or end the Poisoned condition. 7 --- NECKLACE OF FIREBALLS Wondrous Item, Rare This necklace has 1d6 + 3 beads hanging from it. You can take a Magic action to detach a bead and throw it up to 60 feet away. When it reaches the end of its trajectory, the bead detonates as a level 3 Fireball (save DC 15). You can hurl multiple beads, or even the whole necklace, at one time. When you do so, increase the damage of the Fireball by 1d6 for each bead after the first (maximum 12d6). CHAPTER \| TREASURE "\<\<,: M \| ident i pw es: i. \* # Necklace Of Prayer Beads Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Cleric, Druid, or Paladin) This necklace has 1d4 + 2 magic beads made from aquamarine, black pearl, or topaz. It also has many nonmagical beads made from stones such as amber, bloodstone, citrine, coral, jade, pearl, or quartz. If a magic bead is removed from the necklace, that bead loses its magic. Six types of magic beads exist. The DM decides the type of each bead on the necklace or determines it randomly by rolling on the table below. A neck- lace can have more than one bead of the same type. To use one, you must be wearing the necklace. Each bead contains a spell that you can cast from it as a Bonus Action (using your spell save DC if a save is necessary). Once a magic bead's spell is cast, that bead can't be used again until the next dawn. 1d20 Bead Spell 1-6 Bead of Blessing Bless 7-12 Bead of Curing Cure Wounds (level 2 version) 13-16 Bead of Favor Greater Restoration 17-18 Bead of Smiting Shining Smite 19 BeadofSummons Guardian of Faith 20 Bead of Wind Wind Walk Walking NINE LIves STEALER Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. Life Stealing. The weapon has 1d8 + 1 charges. When you attack a creature that has fewer than 100 Hit Points with this weapon and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, the creature must suc- ceed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or be slain instantly as the sword tears its life force from its body. Constructs and Undead succeed on the save automatically. The weapon loses \| charge if the creature is slain. When the weapon has no charges remaining, it loses this property. NOLzurR's MARVELOUS PIGMENTS Wondrous Item, Very Rare This fine wooden box contains 1d4 pots of pigment and a brush (weighing 1 pound in total). NECKLACE OF Nature's Firesaits Manrce # Necklace Of Praver Beaos Nine Lives STEALER (Greatsworo) Noxzur's Marvetous PiGmEeNTs # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 281 282 \_ > ee { OaTHBow Using the brush and expending 1 pot of pigment, you can paint any number of three-dimensional objects and terrain features (such as walls, doors, trees, flowers, weapons, webs, and pits), provided these elements are all confined to a 20-foot Cube. The effort takes 10 minutes (regardless of the num- ber of elements you create), during which time you must remain in the Cube, and requires Concentra- tion. If your Concentration is broken or you leave the Cube before the work is done, all the painted elements vanish, and the pot of pigment is wasted. When the work is done, all the painted objects and terrain features become real. Thus, painting a door on a wall creates an actual door, which can be opened to whatever is beyond. Painting a pit creates a real pit, the entire depth of which must lie within the 20-foot Cube. No object created by a pot of pigment can have a value greater than 25 GP, and the total value of all objects created by a pot of pigment can't exceed 500 GP. If you paint objects of greater value (such as a large pile of gold), they look authentic, but close inspection reveals they're made from paste, cookies, or some other worthless material. If you paint a form of energy such as fire or light- ning, the energy dissipates as soon as you complete the painting, doing no harm. # ------ - --- OATHBOW Weapon (Longbow or Shortbow), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) When you nock an arrow on this bow, it whispers in Elvish, "Swift defeat to my enemies." When you use this weapon to make a ranged attack, you can utter or sign the following command words: "Swift death to you who have wronged me." The target of your attack becomes your sworn enemy until it dies or until dawn 7 days later. You can have only one such sworn enemy at a time. When your sworn enemy dies, you can choose a new one after the next dawn. When you make a ranged attack roll with this weapon against your sworn enemy, you have Ad- vantage on the roll. In addition, your target gains no benefit from Half Cover or Three-Quarters Cover, and you suffer no Disadvantage due to long range. If the attack hits, your sworn enemy takes an extra 3d6 Piercing damage. While your sworn enemy lives, you have Disad- vantage on attack rolls with all other weapons. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE eee Ors or Direcrion OIL OF ETHEREALNESS Potion, Rare One vial of this oil can cover one Medium or smaller creature, along with the equipment it's wearing and carrying (one additional vial is required for each size category above Medium). Ap- plying the oil takes 10 minutes. The affected crea- ture then gains the effect of the Etherealness spell for 1 hour. Beads of this cloudy, gray oil form on the outside of its container and quickly evaporate. OIL OF SHARPNESS Potion, Very Rare One vial of this oil can coat one Melee weapon or twenty pieces of ammunition, but only ammunition and Melee weapons that are nonmagical and deal Slashing or Piercing damage are affected. Applying the oil takes 1 minute, after which the oil magically seeps into whatever it coats, turning the coated weapon into a +3 Weapon or the coated ammunition into +3 Ammunition. This clear, gelatinous oil sparkles with tiny, ultrathin silver shards. OIL OF SLIPPERINESS Potion, Uncommon One vial of this oil can cover one Medium or smaller creature, along with the equipment it's wearing and carrying (one additional vial is required for each size category above Medium). Applying the oil takes 10 minutes. The affected creature then gains the effect of the Freedom of Movement spell for 8 hours. Alternatively, the oil can be poured on the ground as a Magic action, where it covers a 10-foot square, duplicating the effect of the Grease spell in that area for 8 hours. This sticky, black unguent is thick and heavy, but it flows quickly when poured. OrB OF DIRECTION Wondrous Item, Common This orb can be used as an Arcane Focus. While holding this orb, you can take a Magic action to determine which way is magnetic north. Nothing happens if the orb is used in a location that has no magnetic north. OrB OF DRAGONKIND Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement) Long ago, in the Dragonlance setting, elves and humans waged a terrible war against chromatic dragons. When the world seemed doomed, the wizards of the Towers of High Sorcery came together and forged five Orbs of Dragonkind to help defeat the dragons. One orb was taken to each of the five towers, and there they were used to speed the war toward a victorious end. The wizards used the orbs to lure dragons to them, then destroyed the dragons with powerful magic. As the Towers of High Sorcery fell in later ages, the orbs were destroyed or faded into legend, and only three are thought to survive. Their magic has been warped over the centuries. Their primary pur- pose of calling dragons still functions, but they also allow some measure of control over dragons. Each orb contains the essence of an evil dragon, a presence that resents any attempt to coax magic from it. Those who try to wield an orb's magic but lack sufficient force of personality might find them- selves under the orb's control.