# CHAPTER \| TREASURE 223 | | --------------- See 224 i ARTIFACTS An Artifact is a unique, singularly powerful magic item with its own origin and history. It could have been created in the midst of a crisis that threatened a kingdom, a world, or the entire multiverse, and carry the weight of that pivotal moment in history. Some Artifacts appear when they are needed most. For others, the reverse is true; when these Artifacts are discovered, the world trembles at the ramifications of the find. In either case, introducing an Artifact into a campaign requires forethought. It could be an item that opposing sides are hoping to claim, or it might be something the adventurers need to overcome their greatest challenge. Characters don't typically find Artifacts in the normal course of adventuring. In fact, Artifacts appear only when you want them to, for they are as much plot devices as magic items. Tracking down and recovering an Artifact is often the main goal of an adventure. Characters must chase down rumors, undergo significant trials, and venture into danger- ous, half-forgotten places to find the Artifact they seek, Alternatively, a major villain might already have the Artifact. Obtaining and destroying the Ar- tifact could be the only way to ensure that its power can't be used for evil. ARTIFACT PROPERTIES In addition to its defined properties, an Artifact might have other properties that are either benefi- cial or detrimental. You can choose such properties from the tables in this section or determine them randomly. You can also invent new beneficial and detrimental properties. These properties typically change each time an Artifact appears in the world. An Artifact can have as many as four minor ben- eficial properties and two major beneficial proper- ties. It can have.as many as four minor detrimental properties and two major detrimental properties. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE is ee ae i j: phar \<d " + # Minor Beneficial Properties 1d100 Property 01-20 While attuned to the Artifact, you gain pro® ciency in one skill of the DM's choice. While attuned to the Artifact, you have Immunity to the Poisoned condition. While attuned to the Artifact, you have Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened conditions. While attuned to the Artifact, you have Re- sistance to one damage type of the DM's choice. While attuned to the Artifact, you can cast one cantrip (chosen by the DM) from it. While attuned to the Artifact, you can cast one level 1 spell (chosen by the DM) from it. After you cast the spell, roll 1d6. On a roll of 1-S, you can't cast it again in this way until the next dawn. 21-30 31-40 41-50 51-60 61-70 # 71-80 81-90 91-00 As 61-70 above, except the spell is level 2. As 61-70 above, except the spell is level 3. While attuned to the Artifact, you gain a +3 bonus to Armor Class. Major BENEFICIAL PROPERTIES 1d100 Property 01-20 While attuned to the Artifact, one of your ability scores (DM's choice) increases by 2. to a maximum of 24. 21-30 While attuned to the Artifact, you regain 1d6 Hit Points at the start of each of your turns if you have at least 1 Hit Point. When you hit with an attack roll while at- tuned to the Artifact, the target takes an extra 1d6 Force damage. While you're attuned to the Artifact, your Speed increases by 10 feet. While attuned to the Artifact, you can cast one level 4 spell (chosen by the DM) from it. After you cast the spell, roll 1d6. Ona roll of 1-5, you can't cast it again in this way until the next dawn. 31-40 41-50 51-60 # 61-70 71-80 31-90 91-00 As 51-60 above, except the spell is level 5. As 51-60 above, except the spell is level 6. As 51-60 above, except the spell is level 7. While attuned to the Artifact, you have Im- munity to the Blinded, Deafened, Petrified, and Stunned conditions. # Minor Detrimental Properties 1d100 01-08 09-16 17-24 25-32 33-40 41-48 49-66 67-72 73-76 77-80 81-84 85-88 89-92 93-00 Property While attuned to the Artifact, you have Disadvantage on any ability check or saving throw that uses Strength or Constitution, While attuned to the Artifact, you have Disadvantage on Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws. While attuned to the Artifact, you have Vul- nerability to Poison damage. While attuned to the Artifact, you have the Blinded condition when you're more than 10 feet away from it. While attuned to the Artifact, you have the Deafened condition when you're more than 10 feet away from it. While attuned to the Artifact, you lose all sense of smell. While you're attuned to the Artifact, your appearance changes as the DM decides. While attuned to the Artifact, you emit a sour stench noticeable from up to 10 feet away. Whenever you touch a nonmagical gem or an art object while attuned to this Arti- fact, the value of the gem or art object is reduced by half. This affects a particular object only once. While you're attuned to the Artifact, all Holy Water within 10 feet of you is destroyed. While you're attuned to the Artifact, non- magical flames are extinguished within 30 feet of you. While you're attuned to the Artifact, other creatures can't take Short or Long Rests while within 300 feet of you. While attuned to the Artifact, you kill any nonmagical vegetation you touch that isn't a creature. While you're attuned to the Artifact, Beasts within 30 feet of you that have a Challenge Rating of 6 or lower are Hostile toward you. Major DETRIMENTAL PROPERTIES 1d100 01-09 10-18 19-27 28-36 37-45 46-54 55-63 64-72 73-81 82-90 91-96 97-00 Property You can't attune to other magic items while you're attuned to the Artifact. When you become attuned to the Artifact, your Attunement to other magic items ends immediately. When you become attuned to the Artifact, a random one of your ability scores is re- duced by 2, to a minimum of 3. A Greater Restoration spell restores the ability. When you become attuned to the Artifact, you take 8d10 Psychic damage. The first time you become attuned to the Artifact, it gives you a quest determined by the DM. You can't use any of the Artifact's properties until you complete the quest. Each time you become attuned to the Arti- fact, there is a 10 percent chance that you attract the attention of a god who sends an avatar to wrest the Artifact from you. The avatar has the same alignment as its creator and uses the Empyrean stat block. Once it obtains the Artifact, the avatar vanishes. Each time you become attuned to the Arti- fact, you must succeed on a DC 10 Consti- tution saving throw or die from the shock. If you die, you're instantly transformed into a Wight under the DM's control that must protect the Artifact. The Artifact dilutes potions within 10 feet of itself, rendering them nonmagical. The Artifact erases scrolls within 10 feet of itself, rendering them nonmagical. While you're attuned to the Artifact, crea- tures of a particular type other than Hu- manoid (chosen by the DM) are always Hostile toward you. While attuned to the Artifact, you have Vulnerability to all damage. The Artifact imprisons a Death Slaad. Each time you become attuned to the Artifact, the slaad has a 10 percent chance of escap- ing, whereupon it appears in an unoccu- pied space as close to you as possible and attacks you. While attuned to the Artifact, you can't spend Hit Point Dice or regain Hit Points. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 225 tr ee ey see ga ee } - \ acs # Sentient Magic Items Some magic items have sentience and personality. Such an item might be possessed, haunted by the spirit of a previous owner, or self-aware thanks to the magic used to create it. A sentient item might be a cherished ally to its wielder or a continual thorn in the side. Most sentient items are weapons, but other kinds of items can manifest sentience. Single-use items such as potions and scrolls are never sentient. The DM controls sentient magic items and their activated properties. A bearer who maintains a good relationship with the item can access those properties. If the relationship is strained, a conflict can ensue (see "Conflict" below). SENTIENT Macic ITEM TRAITS When you make a sentient magic item, you create the item's persona much as you would create an NPC (as described in the "Nonplayer Characters" section of chapter 3), with these exceptions. Abilities. A sentient magic item has Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores. Choose the item's abilities, or determine them randomly as follows: roll 4d6 for each one, dropping the lowest roll and totaling the rest. Alignment. A sentient magic item has an align- ment. Its creator or nature might suggest an align- ment. Otherwise, pick an alignment or roll on the Sentient Item's Alignment table. Communication. A sentient item communicates by sharing its emotions, broadcasting its thoughts telepathically, or speaking aloud. You can choose how it communicates or roll on the Sentient Item's Communication table. Senses. A sentient item can perceive its surround- ings out to a limited range. You can choose its senses or roll on the Sentient Item's Senses table. Special Purpose. You can give a sentient item an objective it pursues, perhaps to the exclusion of all else. As long as the wielder's use of the item aligns with that special purpose, the item remains cooperative. Deviating from this course might cause conflict between the wielder and the item (see "Con- flict" below). You can pick a special purpose or roll on the Sentient Item's Special Purpose table. # Sentient Item's Alignment 14100 Alignment 14100 Alignment 01-15 Lawful Good 74-85 Chaotic Neutral 16-35 Neutral Good 86-89 Lawful Evil 36-50 Chaotic Good 90-96 Neutral Evil 51-63 Lawful Neutral 97-00 Chaotic Evil 64-73 Neutral # CHAPTER \| TREASURE; » iia. hd? ne, SENTIENT ITEM's COMMUNICATION 1410 Communication 1-6 The item communicates by transmit- ting emotion to the creature carrying or wielding it. 7-9 The item speaks one or more languages. 10 'The item speaks one or more languages. In addition, the item can communicate tele- pathically with any creature that carries or wields it. SENTIENT ITEM's SENSES 1d4 Senses 1 Hearing and standard vision out to 30 feet 2 \_\_ Hearing and standard vision out to 60 feet 3. \_\_ Hearing and standard vision out to 120 feet 4 Hearing and Darkvision out to 120 feet SENTIENT ITEM's SPECIAL PURPOSE 1d10 Special Purpose 1 Aligned. The item seeks to defeat or destroy those of a diametrically opposed alignment. Such an item is never Neutral. 2 Bane. The item seeks to thwart or destroy creatures of a particular type, such as Con- structs, Fiends, or Undead. 3 Creator Seeker. The item seeks its creator and wants to understand why it was created. 4 Destiny Seeker. The item believes it and its bearer have key roles to play in future events. 5 Destroyer. The item craves destruction and goads its user to fight arbitrarily. 6 Glory Seeker. The item seeks renown as the greatest magic item in the world by winning fame or notoriety for its user. 7 Lore Seeker. The item craves knowledge or is determined to solve a mystery, learn a se- cret, or unravel a cryptic prophecy. 8 Protector. The item seeks to defend a par- ticular kind of creature, such as elves or werewolves. 9 Soulmate Seeker. The item seeks another sentient magic item, perhaps one that is similar to itself. 10 Templar. The item seeks to defend the ser- vants and interests of a particular deity. CONFLICT When the bearer of a sentient item acts in a manner opposed to the item's alignment or purpose, conflict can arise. When such a conflict occurs, the item's bearer makes a Charisma saving throw (DC 12 plus the item's Charisma modifier). On a failed save, the item makes one or more of the following demands: Chase My Dreams. The item demands that its bearer pursue the item's goals to the exclusion of all other goals. Get Rid of It. The item demands that its bearer dis- pose of anything the item finds repugnant. It's Time for a Change. The item demands to be given to someone else. Keep Me Close. The item insists on being carried or worn at all times. If its bearer refuses to comply with the item's de- mands, the item can do any of the following: - Make it impossible for its bearer to attune to it. - Suppress one or more of its activated properties. - Attempt to take control of its bearer, whereupon the bearer makes a Charisma saving throw (DC 12 plus the item's Charisma modifier). On a failed save, the bearer has the Charmed condition for 1d12 hours. While Charmed in this way, the bearer must try to follow the item's commands. If the bearer takes damage, it repeats the save, ending the effect on a success. Whether or not the attempt to control its bearer succeeds, the item can't use this power again until the next dawn. Magic Items A-Z Magic items are presented in alphabetical order. If a magic item description capitalizes a creature's name and presents it in bold type, that's a visual cue pointing you to the creature's stat block. Unless the text states otherwise, the stat block is in the Monster Manual. How to read and use a stat block is ex- plained in the Monster Manual and to a lesser degree in the Player's Handbook. # Adamantine Armor Armor (Any Medium or Heavy, Except Hide Armor), Uncommon This suit of armor is reinforced with adamantine, one of the hardest substances in existence. While you're wearing it, any Critical Hit against you be- comes a normal hit. # Adamantine Weapon Weapon (Any Ammunition or Melee Weapon), Uncommon This weapon or piece of ammunition is made of ada- mantine, one of the hardest substances in existence. Whenever this weapon or piece of ammunition hits an object, the hit is a Critical Hit. ALCHEMY JUG Wondrous Item, Uncommon This ceramic jug appears to be able to hold a gal- lon of liquid and weighs 12 pounds whether full or empty. The jug sloshes when it is shaken, even if the jug is empty. You can take a Magic action and name one liquid from the Alchemy Jug Liquids table to cause the jug to produce the chosen liquid. Afterward, you can uncork the jug as a Utilize action and pour that lig- uid out, up to 2 gallons per minute. The maximum amount of liquid the jug can produce depends on the liquid you named. Accwemy Jue ADAMANTINE ARMOR (BrReastpcate) yu CHAPTER \| TREASURE 227 Once the jug starts producing a liquid, it can't a a produce a different one, or more of one that has AMMUNITION, #1, +2, OR +3 reached its maximum, until the next dawn. Weapon (Any Ammunition), Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3) ALCHEMY JuG Liquips } &: You have a bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls Max. Max. ' ie eis a made with this piece of magic ammunition. The bo-, Liquid Amount ---\_ Liquid Amount nus is determined by the rarity of the ammunition.. Acid 8ounces Oil 1 quart Once it hits a target, the ammunition is no longer ie Basic Poison 4 ounces Vinegar 2 gallons magical. B A call Water Rosh Seallon This ammunition is typically found or sold in us eet BRIO DR NES Ses quantities of ten or twenty pieces. Ten pieces of this i Honey 1 gallon Water, salt 12 gallons ammunition are equivalent in value to a potion of se Mayonnaise 2gallons Wine 1 gallon the same rarity. oc ------\_\_\_\_---*---*---*---*--- a \~ fe, AMMUNITION OF SLAYING ra Weapon (Any Ammunition), Very Rare This magic ammunition is meant to slay creatures of a particular type, which the DM chooses or de- termines randomly by rolling on the table below. If a creature of that type takes damage from the am- munition, the creature makes a DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking an extra 6d10 Force damage Pre ae on a failed save or half as much extra damage ona Stavine (Arrow) successful one. After dealing its extra damage to a creature, the ammunition becomes nonmagical. 1d100 Creature Type 14100 Creature Type 01-10 Aberrations 51-60 Fey a 11-15 Beasts 61-70 Fiends oe 16-20 Celestials 71-75 Giants b F 21-25 Constructs 76-80 Monstrosities Fe! 26-35 Dragons 81-85 Oozes ba 36-45 Elementals 86-90 Plants x 46-50 Humanoids 91-00 Undead AMULET OF HEALTH Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) Your Constitution is 19 while you wear this amulet. It has no effect on you if your Constitution is 19 or higher without it. # Amulet Of Proof Against Detection And Location Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this amulet, you can't be targeted by Divination spells or perceived through magical I scrying sensors unless you allow it.. DETECTION AND LocaTiON | CHAPTER7\| TREASURE SS Oe: { } i i; N 8e hee ly & ™ AMULET OF THE PLANES Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this amulet, you can take a Magic action to name a location that you are familiar with on another plane of existence. Then make a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you cast Plane Shift. On a failed check, you and each creature and object within 15 feet of you travel to a random destination determined by rolling 1d100 and consulting the following table. 1d100 Destination 01-60 Random location on the plane you named 61-70 Random location on an Inner Plane deter- mined by rolling 1d6: on a 1, the Plane of Air; on a 2, the Plane of Earth; on a 3, the Plane of Fire; on a 4, the Plane of Water; on a 5, the Feywild; on a 6, the Shadowfell 71-80 Random location on an Outer Plane deter- mined by rolling 1d8: on a 1, Arborea; on a 2, Arcadia; on a 3, the Beastlands; on a 4, Bytopia; on a 5, Elysium; on a 6, Mechanus; on a 7, Mount Celestia; on an 8, Ysgard 81-90 Random location on an Outer Plane deter- mined by rolling 1d8: on a 1, the Abyss; on a 2, Acheron; on a 3, Carceri; on a 4, Ge- henna; on a 5, Hades; on a 6, Limbo; on a 7, the Nine Hells; on an 8, Pandemonium 91-00 Random location on the Astral Plane # Amulet Of The ANIMATED SHIELD Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While holding this Shield, you can take a Bonus Action to cause it to animate. The Shield leaps into the air and hovers in your space to protect you as if you were wielding it, leaving your hands free. The \| Shield remains animate for 1 minute, until you take a Bonus Action to end this effect, or until you die or have the Incapacitated condition, at which point the Shield falls to the ground or into your hand if you have one free. APPARATUS OF KWALISH Wondrous Item, Legendary This item first appears to be a sealed iron barrel weighing 500 pounds. The barrel has a hidden catch, which can be found with a successful DC 20 Intelligence (Investigation) check. Releasing the catch unlocks a hatch at one end of the barrel, al- lowing two Medium or smaller creatures to crawl inside. Ten levers are set in a row at the far end, each in a neutral position, able to move up or down. When certain levers are used, the apparatus trans- forms to resemble a giant lobster. The Apparatus of Kwalish is a Large object with the following statistics: AC 20; HP 200; Speed 30 ft., Swim 30 ft. (or O ft. for both if the legs aren't ex- tended); Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage. To be used as a vehicle, the apparatus requires one pilot. While the apparatus's hatch is closed, the compartment is airtight and watertight. The compartment holds enough air for 10 hours of Apraratus or Kwacisou # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 229 230 Armor of Resistance (LeatHerR Armor) Armor oF INVULNERABILITY APPARATUS OF KWALISH LEVERS Lever Up 1 # 9 10 Legs extend, allowing the apparatus to walk and swim, Forward window shutter opens. Side window shutters open (two per side). Two claws extend from the front side of the apparatus. Each extended claw makes the following melee at- tack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (2d6) Bludgeoning damage. The apparatus walks or swims forward provided its legs are extended. The apparatus turns 90 degrees counterclockwise provided its legs are extended. Eyelike fixtures emit Bright Light in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet. The apparatus sinks up to 20 feet if it's in liquid. The rear hatch unseals and opens. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE breathing, divided by the number of breathing crea- tures inside. The apparatus floats on water. It can also go un- derwater to a depth of 900 feet. Below that, the vehicle takes 2d6 Bludgeoning damage each minute from pressure. A creature in the compartment can take a Utilize action to move as many as two of the apparatus's levers up or down. After each use, a lever goes back to its neutral position. Each lever, from left to right, functions as shown in the Apparatus of Kwalish Levers table. ARMOR, +1, +2, OR +3 Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rare (+1), Very Rare (+2), or Legendary (+3) You have a bonus to Armor Class while wearing this armor. The bonus is determined by its rarity. ARMOR OF GLEAMING Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Common This armor never gets dirty. ARMOR OF INVULNERABILITY Armor (Plate Armor), Legendary (Requires Attunement) You have Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage while you wear this armor. Down Legs retract, reducing the apparatus's Speed and Swim Speed to 0 and making it unable to benefit from bonuses to speed. Forward window shutter closes. Side window shutters close (two per side). The claws retract. Each extended claw makes the following melee attack: +8 to hit, reach 5 ft. Hit: The target has the Grappled condition (escape DC 15). The apparatus walks or swims backward provided its legs are extended. The apparatus turns 90 degrees clockwise provided its legs are extended. The light turns off. The apparatus rises up to 20 feet if it's in liquid. The rear hatch closes and seals. AXKE OF THE Dwarvisw Loros Metal Shell. You can take a Magic action to give yourself Immunity to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage for 10 minutes or until you are no longer wearing the armor. Once this property is used, it can't be used again until the next dawn. ARMOR OF RESISTANCE Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rare (Requires Attunement) You have Resistance to one type of damage while you wear this armor. The DM chooses the type or determines it randomly by rolling on the following table. 1d10 Damage Type 1d10 Damage Type 1 Acid 6 Necrotic 2 Cold 7 'Poison 3. 'Fire 8 Psychic 4 Force 9 Radiant 5 Lightning 10 Thunder ARMOR OF VULNERABILITY Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this armor, you have Resistance to one of the following damage types: Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing. The DM chooses the type or determines it randomly. Curse. This armor is cursed, a fact that is revealed only when the Identify spell is cast on the armor or you attune to it. Attuning to the armor curses you until you are targeted by a Remove Curse spell or similar magic; removing the armor fails to end the curse. While cursed, you have Vulnerability to two of the three damage types associated with the ar- mor (not the one to which it grants Resistance). rir ARMOR ARROW-CATCHING SHIELD Armor (Shield), Rare (Requires Attunement) You gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class against ranged attack rolls while you wield this Shield. This bonus is in addition to the Shield's normal bonus to AC. Whenever an attacker makes a ranged attack roll against a target within 5 feet of you, you can take a Reaction to become the target of the attack instead. AXE OF THE DwWaRVISH LorDS Weapon (Battleaxe), Artifact (Requires Attunement) A young dwarf prince set out to forge a weapon that would be regarded as a symbol of unity among his people. Venturing deep under the mountains, deeper than any dwarf had ever delved, the prince came to the blazing heart of a great volcano. With the aid of Moradin, a god of creation, he first crafted four mighty tools: the Starmetal Pick, the Earthheart Forge, the Anvil of Songs, and the Shap- ing Hammer. With these tools, he forged the Axe of the Dwarvish Lords. Armed with the Artifact, the prince brought peace to the dwarf clans, ending grudges and an- swering slights. The clans became allies, and they threw back their enemies and enjoyed an era of prosperity. This young dwarf is remembered as # CHAPTER \| TREASURE (PLate Armor) 232 the First King. When he became old, he passed the weapon, which had become his badge of office, to his heir. The rightful inheritors passed the axe on for many generations. Later, in an era marked by treachery and wicked- ness, the axe was lost in a bloody civil war fomented by greed for its power and the status it bestowed. Centuries later, the dwarves still search for the axe, and many adventurers have made careers of chas- ing after rumors and plundering old vaults to find it. Magic Weapon. The Axe of the Dwarvish Lords is a magic weapon that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. When you attack a creature with the axe and roll a 20 on the d20 for the attack roll, the axe deals an extra 20 Slashing damage. The axe has the Thrown property with a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. When you hit with a ranged attack using this weapon, it deals an extra 1d8 Force damage, or an extra 2d8 Force damage if the target is a creature of the Giant type. Immediately after hitting or missing, the weapon flies back to your hand. Blessings of Moradin. While attuned to the axe, you gain the following benefits: Darkvision. You gain Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision, its range increases by 60 feet. Fortitude of Stone. Your Constitution increases by 2, toa maximum of 20. Gifts of the Creator. You have proficiency with Brewer's Supplies, Mason's Tools, and Smith's Tools. One with the Forge. You have Immunity to Poison damage and Resistance to Fire damage. Sunder. When you hit an object with the axe, the object takes the maximum amount of damage possible. Conjure Earth Elemental. While holding the axe, you can take a Magic action to summon an Earth Elemental. It appears in an unoccupied space you choose within 30 feet of yourself, understands your languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears after 24 hours, when it dies, or when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. You can't use this property again until the next dawn. Random Properties. The axe has the following ran- dom properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - 2 minor beneficial properties - I major beneficial property - 2 minor detrimental properties # CHAPTER \| TREASURE --- se ee ee Basa Yaca's Dancinc Broom Travel the Depths. You can take a Magic action to touch the axe to a fixed piece of dwarven stonework and cast Teleport from the axe. If your intended des- tination is underground, there is no chance of a mis- hap or arriving somewhere unexpected. You can't use this property again until 3 days have passed. Destroying the Axe. The only way to destroy the axe is to melt it down in the Earthheart Forge, where it was created. It must remain in the burning forge for 50 years before it finally succumbs to the fire and is consumed. BaBA YAGA's DANCING BROOM Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) The archfey Baba Yaga crafted many of these magic brooms. No two appear exactly alike. While holding the broom, you can take a Magic action to transform it into an Animated Broom under your control. The broom then moves into an unoccupied space as close to you as possible. The broom acts immediately after you on your Initiative count and remains animate until you take a Bonus Action and use a command word to render it inanimate. On your turn, you can mentally command the an- imated broom if it is within 30 feet of you and you don't have the Incapacitated condition (no action required). You decide what action the broom takes and where it moves during its next turn, or you can issue it a general command, such as to attack your enemies or guard a location. If the broom is reduced to O Hit Points, it shatters and is destroyed. If the broom reverts to its inani- mate form before losing all its Hit Points, it regains all of them. 1d100 Effect 51-60 1d4+ 4 bright-pink toads crawl forth. Whenever a toad is touched, it transforms This heavy cloth bag contains 3d4 dry beans when into a Large or smaller monster of the found. The bag weighs half a pound regardless of how many beans it contains and becomes a non- magical item when it no longer contains any beans. If you dump one or more beans out of the bag, BaG OF BEANS Wondrous Item, Rare DM's choice that acts in accordance with its alignment and nature. The monster remains for 1 minute, then disappears in a they explode in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on puff of bright-pink smoke. them. All the dumped beans are destroyed in the ex- 61-70 A hungry Bulette burrows up and attacks. plosion, and each creature in the Sphere, including 71-80 A fruit tree grows. It has 1d10 + 20 fruit, you, makes a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d4 Force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. If you remove a bean from the bag, plant it in dirt 1d8 of which act as randomly determined potions. The tree vanishes after 1 hour. Picked fruit remains, retaining any magic or sand, and then water it, the bean disappears as it for 30 days. produces an effect 1 minute later from the ground 81-90 Anest of 1d4 + 3 rainbow-colored eggs where it was planted. The DM can choose an effect springs up. Any creature that eats an egg from the following table or determine it randomly. makes a DC 20 Constitution saving throw. 1d100 Effect On a successful save, a creature perma- nently increases its lowest ability score by 1, randomly choosing among equally low scores. On a failed save, the creature takes 10d6 Force damage from an internal 01 5d4 toadstools sprout. If a creature eats a toadstool, roll any die. On an odd roll, the eater must succeed on a DC 15 Constitu- tion saving throw or take 5d6 Poison dam- age and have the Poisoned condition for 1 explosion. hour. On an even roll, the eater gains 5d6 91-95 A pyramid with a 60-foot-square base Temporary Hit Points for 1 hour. bursts upward. Inside is a burial chamber containing a Mummy, a Mummy Lord, or some other Undead of the DM's choice. Its sarcophagus contains treasure of the DM's choice. 96-00 A giant beanstalk sprouts, growing to a height of the DM's choice. The top leads where the DM chooses, such as to a great view, a cloud giant's castle, or another plane of existence. 02-10 A geyser erupts and spouts water, beer, mayonnaise, tea, vinegar, wine, or oil (DM's choice) 30 feet into the air for 1d4 minutes. 11-20 A Treant sprouts. Roll any die. On an odd roll, the treant is Chaotic Evil. On an even roll, the treant is Chaotic Good. 21-30 An animate but immobile stone statue in your likeness rises and makes verbal threats against you. If you leave it and others come near, it describes you as the most heinous of villains and directs the newcomers to find and attack you. If you are on the same plane of existence as the statue, it knows where you are. The statue becomes inanimate after 24 hours. 31-40 Acampfire with green flames springs forth and burns for 24 hours or until it is extinguished. 41-50 Three Shrieker Fungi sprout. Bac or Beans # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 233 234 BAG OF DEVOURING Wondrous Item, Very Rare This bag resembles a Bag of Holding but is a feeding orifice for a gigantic extradimensional creature. Turning the bag inside out closes the orifice. The extradimensional creature attached to the bag can sense whatever is placed inside the bag. Animal or vegetable matter placed wholly in the bag is devoured and lost forever. When part of a living creature is placed in the bag, as happens when someone reaches inside it, there is a 50 percent chance that the creature is pulled inside the bag. A creature inside the bag can take an action to try to escape, doing so with a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. Another creature can take an ac- tion to reach into the bag to pull a creature out, do- ing so with a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check, provided the puller isn't pulled inside the bag first. Any creature that starts its turn inside the bag is devoured, its body destroyed. Inanimate objects can be stored in the bag, which can hold a cubic foot of such material. However, once each day, the bag swallows any objects inside it and spits them out into another plane of existence. The DM determines the time and plane. If the bag is pierced or torn, it is destroyed, and anything contained within it is transported to a random location on the Astral Plane. BAG OF HOLDING Wondrous Item, Uncommon This bag has an interior space considerably larger than its outside dimensions---roughly 2 feet square and 4 feet deep on the inside. The bag can hold up to 500 pounds, not exceeding a volume of 64 cubic feet. The bag weighs 5 pounds, regardless of its contents. Retrieving an item from the bag requires a Utilize action. If the bag is overloaded, pierced, or torn, it is de- stroyed, and its contents are scattered in the Astral Plane. If the bag is turned inside out, its contents spill forth unharmed, but the bag must be put right before it can be used again. The bag holds enough air for 10 minutes of breathing, divided by the num- ber of breathing creatures inside. Placing a Bag of Holding inside an extradimen- sional space created by a Heward's Handy Haversack, Portable Hole, or similar item instantly destroys both items and opens a gate to the Astral Plane. The gate originates where the one item was placed inside the other. Any creature within a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on the gate is sucked through it to a ran- dom location on the Astral Plane. The gate then closes. The gate is one-way and can't be reopened. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Jay. 4 ™ BAG OF TRICKS Wondrous Item, Uncommon This bag made from gray, rust, or tan cloth appears empty. Reaching inside the bag, however, reveals the presence of a small, fuzzy object. You can take a Magic action to pull the fuzzy ob- ject from the bag and throw it up to 20 feet. When the object lands, it transforms into a creature you determine by rolling on the table that corresponds to the bag's color. See the Monster Manual for the creature's stat block. The creature vanishes at the next dawn or when it is reduced to O Hit Points. The creature is Friendly to you and your allies, and it acts immediately after you on your Initiative count. You can take a Bonus Action to command how the creature moves and what action it takes on its next turn, such as attacking an enemy. In the ab- sence of such orders, the creature acts in a fashion appropriate to its nature. Once three fuzzy objects have been pulled from the bag, the bag can't be used again until the next dawn. Gray Bac oF Tricks 1d8 Creature 1d8 Creature 1 Weasel 5 Panther 2 Giant Rat 6 Giant Badger 3 Badger 7 '\~Dire Wolf 4 Boar 8 Giant Elk Rust BaG oF Tricks 1d8 Creature 1d8 Creature 1 Rat 5 Giant Goat 2 Owl 6 Giant Boar 3. Mastiff 7 Lion 4 Goat 8 Brown Bear TAN BAG OF Tricks 1d8 Creature 1d8 Creature 1 Jackal 5 Black Bear 2 Ape 6 Giant Weasel 3. Baboon 7 Giant Hyena 4 Axe Beak 8 Tiger BEAD OF FORCE Wondrous Item, Rare This small black sphere measures 3/4 of an inch in diameter and weighs an ounce. Typically, 1d4 + 4 Beads of Force are found together. Bac or Devourine You can take a Magic action to throw the bead up to 60 feet. The bead explodes in a 10-foot-radius Sphere on impact and is destroyed. Each creature in the Sphere must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 5d4 Force damage. A sphere of transparent force then encloses the area for 1 minute. Any creature that failed the save and is completely within the area is trapped inside this sphere. Creatures that succeeded on the save or are partially within the area are pushed away from the center of the sphere until they are no longer inside it. Only breathable air can pass through the sphere's wall, No attack or other effect can pass through. An enclosed creature can take a Utilize action to push against the sphere's wall, moving the sphere up to half the creature's Speed. The sphere can be picked up, and its magic causes it to weigh only 1 pound, regardless of the weight of creatures inside. BEAD OF NOURISHMENT Wondrous Item, Common This flavorless, gelatinous bead dissolves on your tongue and provides as much nourishment as 1 day of Rations. BEAD OF REFRESHMENT Wondrous Item, Common This flavorless, gelatinous bead dissolves in liquid, transforming up to a pint of the liquid into fresh, cold drinking water. The bead has no effect on mag- ical liquids or harmful substances such as poison. Bac of Novoins Bac of Tricks Beir oF DwarRvENKINO BELT OF DWARVENKIND Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) While wearing this belt, you gain the following benefits: Dwarvish. You know Dwarvish. Friend of Dwarvenkind. You have Advantage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks made to interact with dwarves and duergar. Toughness. Your Constitution increases by 2, toa maximum of 20. In addition, while attuned to the belt, you have a 50 percent chance each day at dawn of growing a full beard if you can grow one, or a thicker beard if you already have one. If you aren't a dwarf or duergar, you gain the fol- lowing additional benefits while wearing the belt: Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. Resilience. You have Resistance to Poison damage. You also have Advantage on saving throws you make to avoid or end the Poisoned condition. CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 235 BELT OF GIANT STRENGTH Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement) While wearing this belt, your Strength changes to a score granted by the belt. The type of giant deter- mines the score (see the table below). The item has no effect on you if your Strength without the belt is equal to or greater than the belt's score. Belt Str. Rarity Belt of Giant Strength (hill) 21 \~---s\*Rare Belt of Giant Strength (frost 23. ---- Very Rare or stone) Belt of Giant Strength (fire) 25 \~='Very Rare Belt of Giant Strength (cloud) 27 Legendary Belt of Giant Strength (storm) 29 Legendary # Berserker Axe Weapon (Battleaxe, Greataxe, or Halberd), Rare (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. In addition, while you are attuned to this weapon, your Hit Point maximum increases by 1 for each level you have attained. Curse. This weapon is cursed, and becoming at- tuned to it extends the curse to you. As long as you remain cursed, you are unwilling to part with the weapon, keeping it within reach at all times. You Be.r or Gianr STRENGTH (Fire) # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Becr or Giant STRencrn (Stone) also have Disadvantage on attack rolls with weap- ons other than this one. Whenever another creature damages you while the weapon is in your possession, you must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or go berserk. This berserk state ends when you start your turn and there are no creatures within 60 feet of you that you can see or hear. While berserk, you regard the creature nearest to you that you can see or hear as your enemy. If there are multiple possible creatures, choose one at random. On each of your turns, you must move as close to the creature as possible and take the Attack action, targeting the creature. If you're unable to get close enough to the creature to attack it with the weapon, your turn ends after you've used up all your available movement. If the creature dies or can no longer be seen or heard by you, the next nearest creature that you can see or hear becomes your new target. BLACKRAZOR Weapon (Greatsword), Artifact (Requires Attunement) Hidden in the dungeon of White Plume Mountain, Blackrazor shines like a piece of night sky filled with stars. Its black scabbard is decorated with pieces of cut obsidian. Berserxer Axe (Battreaxe) You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. If you hit an Undead with this weapon, you take 1d10 Necrotic damage, and the target regains 1d10 Hit Points. If this Necrotic damage reduces you to O Hit Points, Blackrazor devours your soul (see "Devour Soul" below). While you hold this weapon, you have Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened conditions, and you have Blindsight with a range of 30 feet. Devour Soul. Whenever you use Blackrazor to reduce a creature to O Hit Points, the sword slays the creature and devours its soul unless it is a Con- struct or an Undead. A creature whose soul has been devoured by Blackrazor can be restored to life only by a Wish spell. When Blackrazor devours a soul that isn't yours, you gain Temporary Hit Points equal to the slain creature's Hit Point maximum. Haste. Blackrazor can cast Haste on you, after which it can't cast this spell again until the next dawn. Blackrazor decides when to cast the spell, which takes effect at the start of your turn. The spell lasts for 1 minute (no Concentration required) or until Blackrazor decides to end it, which it can do at the end of any of your turns. Sentience. Blackrazor is a sentient Chaotic Neutral weapon with an Intelligence of 17, a Wisdom of 10, and a Charisma of 19, It has hearing and Darkvision out to 120 feet. The weapon speaks Common and can communi- cate with its wielder telepathically. Its voice is deep and echoing. While you are attuned to it, Blackrazor also understands every language you know. Personality. Blackrazor speaks with an imperious tone, as though accustomed to being obeyed. The sword's purpose is to consume souls. It doesn't care whose souls it eats, including the wield- er's. The sword believes that all matter and energy sprang from a void of negative energy and will one day return to it. Blackrazor is meant to hurry that process along. Despite its nihilism, Blackrazor feels a strange kin- ship to Wave and Whelm, two other weapons locked away under White Plume Mountain. It wants the three weapons to be reunited and wielded together in combat, even though it violently disagrees with Whelm and finds Wave tedious. Blackrazor's hunger for souls must be regularly fed. If the sword goes 3 days or more without con- suming a soul, a conflict between it and its wielder occurs at the next sunset. Destroying Blackrazor. Blackrazor can be destroyed by crushing it in the great gears of Mechanus. Pri- mus, the creator of the modrons, also knows a series of musical tones that Blackrazor can't stand to hear, causing the sword to shatter. BOOK OF EXALTED DEEDS. Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement) bp The definitive treatise on all that is good in the ' multiverse, the Book of Exalted Deeds figures promi- nently in many religions. Rather than being a scrip- ture devoted to a particular faith, the book's au- thors filled the pages with their own visions of true virtue, providing guidance for defeating evil. The Book of Exalted Deeds rarely lingers in one place. As soon as the book is read, it vanishes to some other corner of the multiverse where its moral guidance can bring hope to an endangered world. Although attempts have been made to copy the work, efforts to do so fail to capture its magical na- ture or translate the benefits it offers to those pure of heart and firm of purpose. A heavy clasp, wrought to look like angel wings, keeps the book's contents secure. Only a creature that is attuned to the book can release the clasp that holds it shut. Once the book is opened, the attuned creature must spend 80 hours reading and studying the book to digest its contents and gain its benefits. Other creatures that peruse the book's open pages can read the text but glean no deeper meaning and reap no benefits. A Fiend, an Undead, or a servant of a god from the Lower Planes that tries to read from the book takes 24d6 Radiant damage. This damage CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 237 238 ignores Resistance and Immunity, and it can't be re- duced or avoided by any means. A creature reduced to O Hit Points by this damage disappears in a flash and is destroyed, leaving its possessions behind. The book then vanishes, and the creature's Attunement to it ends. Benefits granted by the Book of Exalted Deeds last only as long as you strive to do good. If you fail to perform at least one act of kindness or generosity within the span of 10 days, or if you willingly per- form an evil act, you lose all the benefits granted by the book. Celestial Calm. While attuned to the book, you have Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened conditions and Resistance to Psychic damage. These benefits become permanent after you spend the requisite amount of time reading and studying the book. Divine Wisdom. After you spend the requisite amount of time reading and studying the book, your Wisdom increases by 2, to a maximum of 24. You can't gain this benefit from the book more than once. Enlightened Magic. After you spend the requisite amount of time reading and studying the book, any spell slot you expend to cast a spell counts as a spell slot of one level higher. Halo. After you spend the requisite amount of time reading and studying the book, you gain a protective halo. This halo sheds Bright Light in a 10- foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. You can dismiss or manifest the halo as a Bonus Boox or Exacreo Deeos