# Central Flanaess Locations Location Ruler Celene Queen Yolande (elf) Dyvers (Free City) Magister Thymantia Gortoz (aasimar) Furyondy, the Kingdom of Highfolk (Free City) King Belvor IV (human) Mayor Talisyr (appears as an elf) Nine hierarchs (mostly humans and hobgoblins) Horned Society, the luz luz (cambion demigod) Nyr Dyv = Perrenland Voorzitter Yrenda Schwartzen (human) Pomarj, the \_- Shield Lands, the Various allied nobles Veluna, the Canon Hazen (human) Archclericy of Verbobonc (Free City Viscountess Wilfrick Rejjin and Viscounty) (human) Wild Coast, the Various burgomasters, lord mayors, and others Upon winning his freedom, luz had no trouble re- claiming his homeland. He forged tenuous alliances with the leaders of the Bandit Kingdoms and the Horned Society, whom he controls through terror. With their aid, he aims to destroy his neighbors and lay waste to the Free City of Greyhawk. Since the resurgence of luz, the northern quar- ter of the Vesve Forest and the eastern part of the Howling Hills have become filled with marauders and monsters. While the Wegwiur battle Iuz's forces in the Howling Hills, scouts and troops from Furyondy join forces with Highfolk's defenders to drive out the Vesve Forest's evil inhabitants. CENTRAL FLANAESS CULTURE The culture of the Central Flanaess is a result of the long imposition of the Great Kingdom's rule over a variety of peoples living in close proximity. These peoples, by and large, share the Great Kingdom's practical, hardworking values, and they rely on the family and local community, rather than the might of nations and armies. They have a strong, egalitarian streak unlike the Great Kingdom's strict \_ social hierarchy, and (beyond the domains of luz Description Elven monarchy with large gnome and halfling populations Important port and trading center with a powerful navy Former province of the Great Kingdom, among the first to claim independence Fortified city with large population of elves; the mayor is a % disguised adult silver dragon Theocracy ruled by devil worshipers allied with luz, sup- ported by mercenaries enforcing their tyrannical rule The monster-infested domain of the demonic dictator, " steeped in wickedness 4 The Lake of Unknown Depths; home to barge dwellers Fiercely independent confederation of canons Lawless peninsula; home to bandits and marauders Independent alliance of nobles protected by the Knights of Holy Shielding, led by Knight Commander Aleshh Kaarth (dragonborn) and fortified by Furyondy and Urnst Theocracy ruled by priests of Rao, a divine beacon of jus- tice and hope Vassal state of Veluna; site of the Temple of Elemental Evil Free territory with self-governing settlements; haven for outcasts and dissidents and the Horned Society) they have little tolerance for would-be tyrants or aloof nobility. Amid a large number of free cities and confederations, the mon- archies of Furyondy and Celene are far more demo- cratic in practice than those in other regions. Typical dress in the Central Flanaess includes a tunic of varying length, sometimes worn with close-fitting trousers. A cape or cloak, usually fea- turing patterns of ovals or diamonds, completes the ensemble. The cuisine of the Central Flanaess uses rice and potatoes alongside cheese and meat that is typically boiled or roasted. # Central Flanaess Adventures The dual threats of luz and Elemental Evil pres- ent abundant opportunities for adventure in the Central Flanaess (see "Greyhawk Conflicts" in this chapter). This region is particularly appropriate for campaigns flavored with epic fantasy, supernatu- ral horror, or war (see "Flavors of Fantasy" in this chapter). This region is also home to many of the most famous dungeons and ruins of Greyhawk, in- cluding those described in the sections that follow. a --- ore # CHAPTER \|GREYHAWK 16 3 Ley i Ghost Tower of Inverness. Ages ago, an archmage raised the mighty fortress of Inverness from the very rock of the Abbor-Alz. In the great inner tower of the keep, he hid his most prized possession: the Soul-Gem. Legend says this great white diamond fell from the sky and glowed with the brilliance of the sun, and its magic could drag mortal souls screaming from their bodies and trap them. The fortress was ruined long ago, but on foggy nights the great central tower still appears. Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth. The archmage Iggwilv is said to have acquired much of her prowess from the hidden magic she discovered within the Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth (pronounced SAWJ-kahn). In these caverns she conducted experiments and rituals to increase her powers. One of these rituals led to her downfall, though, when she accidentally freed the demon lord Graz'zt from the prison where she had bound him. Though Graz'zt fled to the Abyss, Iggwilv was weakened and forced to aban- don the caverns, but a secret cache of her treasure is said to remain. The Lost Caverns of Tsojcanth are detailed in Quests from the Infinite Staircase. Maure Castle. Maure Castle is a forlorn and fore- boding place surrounded by boggy ground and scraggly trees. Rumors suggest that a tome holding eldritch lore of unimaginable evil is held within, guarded by a powerful demon. Temple of Elemental Evil. The Temple of Elemental Evil, built long ago, spawned hordes of bloodthirsty monsters that ravaged the lands between Celene and Veluna. As far as anyone in the area knows, the temple is currently abandoned and has not posed a threat since the Battle of Emridy Meadows in 569 CY, but the forces of good in the region keep vigilant against any sign that the temple and its cults might arise once more. EASTERN FLANAESS Once a powerful force for order and good, the Great Kingdom of Aerdy has declined over the last century to a state of utter decadence. The reign- ing overking---Ivid V, patriarch of the House of Naelax---is rumored to have fiendish advisers as well as a noble court infested with evil. Ruling from the Malachite Throne in Rauxes, Ivid commands an unmatched army currently embroiled in two wars at once: one against the Kingdom of Nyrond and the Prelacy of Almor, and the other against the Iron League (consisting of Idee, Irongate, the Lordship of the Isles, Onnwal, and Sunndi). To pay for these costly wars, the overking has imposed heavy taxes on his subjects, further diminishing his popularity. Aerdiaak, Ahlissa, Medegia, and Rel Astra are provinces and fiefs of the Great Kingdom. The Sea Baronies are vassal states that provide most of the kingdom's navy. eas ae 5 \| GREYHAWK " SHAR Fanatical Suloise militarists called the Scarlet Order founded the Hidden Empire of Shar, which is closed to outsiders. The order controls the peninsula west of the Tilva Strait, as far north as the Vast Swamp. See "Factions and Organizations" in this chapter for more about the Scarlet Order. # Eastern Flanaess Culture The culture of the Eastern Flanaess is largely that of the ancient Aerdi tribe of humans that conquered the region and established the Great Kingdom al- most 800 years ago. The Aerdi valued common sense, hard work, and knowing one's place in a strict social order. Having claimed their position of power through conquest, they put great emphasis on military power and martial skill. These values persist throughout the region, reinforced in the Great Kingdom by strict laws and even stricter social mores. These same values persist in many of the lands resisting the overking's reign. Nyrond and Almor, in particular, share the stratified social structure of the Great Kingdom, with their king and prelate re- maining distant from the common people they rule. The independent states of the Iron League are more egalitarian, sharing that trait with the peoples of the Central Flanaess. Typical clothing in the Eastern Flanaess is a tunic of varying length, often worn with trousers, with a cape or cloak. The fabrics of the east are often pat- terned with checks or plaids, with different patterns often relating to the wearer's lineage. Eastern cui- sine pairs rice and potatoes with a variety of meats, especially seafood. EASTERN FLANAESS AND ITs NEIGHBORS The Duchy and County of Urnst bridge the regions of the Central and Eastern Flanaess. Once part of the Great Kingdom's province of Nyrond, they de- clared their independence from the Great Kingdom and the new Kingdom of Nyrond at the same time, achieving their separation from Nyrond with min- imal bloodshed. While the people of Urnst distrust the king of Nyrond, they don't hate him like they do the overking. The proximity of the Nyr Dyv, the Cairn Hills, and the Shield Lands means the Urnst lands can't ignore the rising threat of luz or the politics of the Free City of Greyhawk. At the same time, Nyrond stands as a buffer between Urnst and the Great Kingdom, but the overking's threat still looms. The duke and countess of Urnst believe that a united Urnst will stand more strongly against pressures from east and west, which they hope to achieve through the marriage of Countess Belissica Gellor to Byron Lorinar, eldest son of Duke Jalken Lorinar. i a we \_ EASTERN FLANAESS LOCATIONS Location Ruler Description Aerdiaak Herzog Varz Grenell North province of the Great Kingdom, ruled by a cousin of (human) the overking; its court is rife with debauchery and intrigue Ahlissa Herzogin Seprenna Calyn South province of the Great Kingdom, ruled by a cousin of (human) the overking; embroiled in war with the lron League Almor, the Prelacy of Prelate Xanther Klimstyn Theocracy ruled by a priest of Pelor who declared indepen- (human) dence when the Great Kingdom descended into evil Bone March, the --- Fallen territory of the Great Kingdom, now held by armies from Almor and Nyrond Celadon Forest = Ancient forest protected by druidic circles and fey Flinty Hills and a Home to several independent communities with no great Gamboge Forest love for Nyrond or the Pale Great Kingdom, the Overking Ivid V (human) Unspeakably evil monarchy Idee Count Vasiliek Donsten ---\_ Independent fiefdom; member of the Iron League (human) lrongate (Free City) Mayor Unthera Selvich --- Thriving metropolis; member of the Iron League; the (appears as a dwarf) mayor is a disguised adult bronze dragon Lordship of the Isles, the Princess Ronthal III Independent principality; member of the lron League (human) Medegia, the See of Holy Censor Starvik Jerel Theocratic fiefdom ruled by a priest whose power is (human) rumored to come from pacts with archdevils Nyrond, the Kingdom of King Dunstan! (human) Center of resistance to the Great Kingdom Onnwal The Raven of Onnwal, Independent state; member of the lron League Zyl Grayshadow (dwarf) Pale, the Theocracy Supreme PrelateOgon \_Theocracy ruled by a priest of Pholtus of the Tillit (human) Rel Astra, City of Constable Mayor Drax Independent fief plotting in secret against the Great King- (orc) dom, hoping to ally with Medegia or the Sea Baronies Sea Baronies, the Four sea barons, includ- Independent island fiefdoms that serve as the Great ing High Admiral Kalashe Kingdom's navy Asperdi (human) Shar, the Hidden Father of Obedience Isolated order of Suloise militants whose spies operate Empire of Korenth Zan (human?) \_ across the Flanaess Spindrift Isles, the The Council of Five (on ---\_ Independent islands that keep watchful eyes on aggressive the northern islands) and island neighbors the Council of Seven (on the southern island) Sunndi Steward Valenta (elf) Independent fiefdom; member of the Iron League Tenh, the Duchy of Duchess Ehliyah Raynar Independent fiefdom allied with Nyrond for defense Ill (human) against luz Urnst, the County of Countess Belissica Gellor Independent fiefdom (human) Urnst, the Duchy of Duke Jalken Lorinar Independent fiefdom (human) Vast Swamp, the --- Morass separating the Tilvanot Peninsula and Shar from the rest of the East # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK / 165 --- 7 # Eastern Flanaess Adventures The story of the Eastern Flanaess is a tale of scrappy rebels---Nyrond, Almor, and the Iron League---defying the overwhelming power of a corrupt and decadent empire. This story lends itself to campaigns exploring themes of supernatural hor ror (in the fiend-haunted courts of the overking), swashbuckling (in the cities across the region as well as the eastern seas), and war (see "Flavors of Fantasy" in this chapter). Havens of Unrest. Those who despise and chal- lenge the Great Kingdom's oppression---outlaws both good and bad---find refuge in borderlands just beyond the reach of the overking's soldiers. These include the woods and swamp near Rel Astra (the eastern reaches of the Grandwood Forest and the Lone Heath) and the Hestmark Highlands east of Sunndi. The outlaws in the Grandwood include significant numbers of elves and halflings as well as humans, while those in the Hestmark Highlands include dwarves and gnomes. Tomb of Horrors. Deep within the Vast Swamp is the sinister Tomb of Horrors\~a labyrinthine crypt filled with terrible traps, strange and ferocious Tet Toms of Horrors Lies fer werein THE Vast Swamp. ed, monsters, and rich and magical treasures. Some- where within rests the demilich Acererak, who ruled much of the region long ago. The demilich is said to take perverse pleasure in devouring adven- turers' souls. The Tomb of Horrors is detailed in Tales from the Yawning Portal. Troll Fens. The chilly mists of the Troll Fens, lo- cated against the shoulders of the Griff Mountains and the Rakers at the head of the Yol River, cloak a place of unnameable horrors. As the name implies, the fens are infested with particularly large and vicious trolls. The Pale carefully hedges the place with watchtowers and keeps, and strong patrols ride the verges of the southern end of the Troll Fens to watch for unwelcome visits from the monsters dwelling within. # Northern Flanaess The northern region of the Flanaess includes three distinct areas populated by different peoples: the Baklunish horse riders of the Chakyik and the Wegwiur, the Suloise people of the North King- doms, and the Flan nomads of the Hunting Lands. "4 ee ae Sr \] ei BAKLUNISH NOMADS The Chakyik and Wegwiur---called Tiger Nomads and Wolf Nomads, respectively, by their neighbors--- are horse riders of Baklunish descent who dwell on the steppes north of the Yatil Mountains and Lake Quag. The climate in the steppes and pine forests ranges from cool to frigid. Both peoples maintain scattered trading outposts that welcome visitors from neighboring and distant lands. The steppe nomads have a rich storytelling tradi- tion that reinforces a strong sense of clan identity and family line within the clan. Their tales include stories not only of heroes within their clans, but also of heroic horses, and the nomads trace equine lineages as carefully as their own. These nomads maintain the traditions of their people, many of which can be traced back to the ancient Baklunish empire. The Baklunish nomads favor bright pastel col- ors in gowns and robes. When traveling or at war, though, they prefer more rugged gear of leather and hide. THE Nortu KInGpoMs Three kingdoms of related peoples occupy the Thill- onrian Peninsula in the northeast of the Flanaess---a beautiful subarctic landscape of high mountains, # Northern Flanaess Locations Location Ruler Arn, the Archbarony of \| Archbaron of Arn (identity unknown) Bandit Kingdoms, the \_ Four to six bandit lords Barren Wastes, the Chakyik Lord Agul Krusef (human) Overlord-Protector Yhareen Sakarr (tiefling) Queen Tharla of the Hunting Lands, the North Kingdom of the Cruski, the Cruski (human) North Kingdom of the King Hundgred of the Fruzti, the Fruzti (human) North Kingdom ofthe Queen Ingrid of the Schnai, the Schnai (human) Baron Lexnol Haarkof (human) Ratik, the Barony of Stonefist, The Hold of King Sevvord Redbeard of the Hold (human) Wolf-Mother Bargra Yefkos (human) Wegwiur =\< a coniferous forests, and deep fjords. The kingdoms are named for the three distinct tribal lines that inhabit them: the Cruski (whose name means "ice"), the Fruzti ("frost"), and the Schnai ("snow"). The Schnai are strong and numerous. When Queen Ingrid of the Schnai has a mind to raid the isles of the Sea Baronies or the coasts of Aerdiaak and the Great Kingdom, she calls upon the king of the Fruzti and the queen of the Cruski to join her army. King Hundgred of the Fruzti has no choice but to honor his oath to the Schnai, while Queen Tharla of the Cruski rarely turns down a chance to attack her enemies. At other times, the Cruski raid the Fruzti, the Schnai, or the Hold of Stonefist. As their distinct kingdoms suggest, the people of the North Kingdoms value their connection to their clan lineage. They preserve a love of learning from their distant ancestors of the Suel Imperium, and they value knowledge of the natural world as highly as they do the skills of hunting, sailing, and war- fare. Their clothing includes shirts and pants made 7 of wool, augmented with furs, capes, mittens, and ( warm boots. They often wear large pins, brooches, or emblems in their cloaks as a sign of wealth or accomplishment. Description Remote and little-known region located near a ruined castle with monster-filled dungeons Feuding kingdoms ruled by greedy bandit lords with private armies Harsh, despoiled land where dragons roam and some- times go to die Land of the Tiger Nomads---horse riders with scattered trading outposts Home to Flan nomads, known to their neighbors as the Rovers of the Barrens Fierce, seafaring berserkers of the North Kingdoms Weakest of the three North Kingdoms, having suffered great losses battling in the Bone March Strongest and most populated of the North Kingdoms Former province of the Great Kingdom trying to ally with the North Kingdoms Monarchy founded by a bandit leader who attracted malcontents from many nations Land of the Wolf Nomads---horse riders engaged in war against luz # Aoventurers In The North Kingooms Help A # Frost Giant's Pet Mammoth Fino Its Way HomeTHe HuntinG LAnps The People of the Hunting Lands (called Rovers of the Barrens by their neighbors) have a history of raiding the outskirts of Furyondy, the Bandit King- doms, Tenh, and Wegwiur, which hasn't won them many allies. The nomads' legendary dominance of the north has faded, as the forces of luz and the Horned Society wage steady war against them while raiders from the Hold of Stonefist prey on the Hunting Lands farther east. Many of the Rovers' mightiest warriors---the Wardogs---have perished in battles against all these relentless foes. The people of the Hunting Lands value a close connection to the natural world. They view nature as an entity to be respected, not controlled, and their myths and legends teach the value of accept- ing nature's bounty as a gift that evokes gratitude. They wear clothes made entirely of animal skins, including belts, capes, robes, and slippers, and decorate their skin with paints and tattoos. NORTHERN FLANAESS AND Its NEIGHBORS The regions of the north exist on the fringes of other regions of the Flanaess. Three realms are the primary points of intersection between the North- ern Flanaess and neighboring areas. Bandit Kingdoms. The Bandit Kingdoms is a law- less frontier between the Hunting Lands in the # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK a 2 north, the Horned Society and the Shield Lands in the Central Flanaess, and the Duchy of Tenh in the east. No single bandit lord is powerful enough to conquer the whole territory, and the combined strength of all is often required to defend against retaliation by neighboring states for the bandit lords' aggression. At least one of the bandit lords, Renfus the Mottled (ruler of Stoink), is wholly in the service of luz. Ratik. As a former province of the Great Kingdom, Ratik rides the boundary between the northern and eastern regions of the Flanaess. Without the protec- tion of the Great Kingdom, Ratik has been forced to defend itself against frequent raids from the North Kingdoms and the Sea Baronies, as well as attacks from mountain-dwelling monsters. Baron Lexnol Haarkof's emissaries hope to forge an alliance with the North Kingdoms and redirect the berserkers' aggressions toward the Hold of Stonefist. Wegwiur. Wolf-Mother Bargra Yefkos of the We- gwiur Hordes is preoccupied with the threat of Iuz, and she meets frequently with clan leaders and Per- renlander mercenaries to strategize. The Wegwiur consider their territory to extend to the Dulsi River, so they fiercely defend the western Howling Hills from the incursion of the hideous monsters that serve luz. Several large battles between Wegwiur and the forces of Iuz have taken place in that area. ng OLD KEOLAND Locations Location Ruler Bissel, the March of Margrave Imran Rendulkar (human) Geoff, the Grand Duchy of Gran March, the Grand Duchess Owena Blackthorn (human) Commandant Magnus Onyxbeard (dwarf) Hold of the Sea Prince Zygmund III of Princes, the Monmurg (human) Keoland, the King Kimbertos Skotti Kingdom of (human) Lortmil Mountains, the Sterich, the March of --- Marquise Quercha Emondav (human) Countess Lewenn Richfield (human) Duke Grenowin (elf) Princess Olynn Corond Ulek, the County of Ulek, the Duchy of Ulek, the Principality of (dwarf) Valley of the Mage, the The Mage of the Valley {identity unknown) Yeomanry, the Freeholder Vyndi Skyspear (goliath) # Northern Flanaess Adventures The cold north is an ideal location for a campaign featuring themes of sword-and-sorcery fantasy (see "Flavors of Fantasy" in this chapter). The peoples of the Northern Flanaess battle giants, dragons, and other horrific monsters in equally dangerous envi- ronments, while remaining suspicious of the deca- dence of the cities and nations of the south. # Old Keoland United by their shared history as part of the ancient Kingdom of Keoland, the marches and fiefdoms between the Lortmil Mountains and the higher mountains to the west gather diverse populations of many different species in relative peace with each other. Even the long-standing feud between Keoland and the Hold of the Sea Princes might be drawing to an end under the leadership of Keoland's current ruler, King Kimbertos Skotti. The region enjoys a warm, mild climate but faces many threats from monstrous foes. Description Bone of contention between Keoland, Veluna, and Ket Isolated fiefdom with a long history of battling giants in the nearby mountains Nominal vassal of Keoland and ally with Bissel; the com- mandant is elected from among the March's noble houses Independent oligarchy of sea traders founded by bucca- neers; now a powerful naval force Heart of the Old Keoland region, surrounded by friendly neighbors that swear fealty to Keoland's monarch Natural border between the Old Keoland region and the Central Flanaess Nominal vassal state of Keoland, but its ruler is more like a sister than a vassal to the king of Keoland Former vassal of Keoland Former vassal of Keoland with a large population of elves Fiefdom with a significant navy; its princess commands the respect of many dwarves beyond Ulek Secluded refuge of an ancient archmage; current inhabi- tants unknown independent republic governed by an elected freeholder # Old Keoland Culture Old Keoland is a diverse region of the Flanaess where different cultures have mingled for many centuries. Keolish folk often garden, maintain close family ties, have a down-to-earth nature, and love storytelling. The clothes worn in Old Keoland tend toward loose-fitting shirts and wide-legged pants, volu- minous cloaks for cold or wet weather, and sturdy boots. This region's cuisine represents a fusion of Central Flan dishes of rice, potato, and meat with some spices and seasonings brought from the west, creating unique flavors. OLD KEOLAND AND Its NEIGHBORS The long chain of the Lortmil Mountains forms a natural barrier between Old Keoland and the region of the Central Flanaess. The mountains contain some of the richest gem and precious metal de- posits in Eastern Oerik. The humans, dragonborn, dwarves, gnomes, halflings, goblinoids, goliaths, and orcs that live in these mountains and their foothills are subjects of the realms that surround the moun- tain range, but they often band together to deal with greater threats on both sides of the mountains. # CHAPTER\|GREYHAWK \ # Beneath The Beautiful Surface Of The # Mellfurnaces Lie Enoless Hidden Evils hs # Old Keoland Adventures One reason for the amicable relations among the nations of Old Keoland is the danger posed by drag- ons, giants, and other monsters found throughout the region. That makes this region particularly well suited to a heroic fantasy campaign (see "Flavors of Fantasy" in this chapter). The most dangerous places include those described below. Barrier Peaks. These forbidding highlands are home to strange monsters. "Expedition to the Bar- rier Peaks," an adventure in Quests from the Infinite Staircase, explores the origin of these monsters. Crystalmist Mountains, Giants, white dragons, and other monsters frequently descend from the Crys- talmist Mountains into Geoff and Sterich, searching for food and plunder. An ancient tunnel stretches from the western end of the Yeomanry into the Sea of Dust, attracting many adventurers to explore its lengths. Dim Forest. Though elves inhabit the western part of the Dim Forest, the eastern part is wild and prowled by monsters, including green dragons. Hellfurnaces. The Hellfurnaces are a volcanically active extension of the Crystalmist Mountains populated with threats including fire giants and red dragons. Beneath the mountains are labyrinths that ' CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK i = ™ a connect to the Underdark, wherein lie hidden cities, strongholds, and temples harboring terrible evil. Jotens. Hill giants, manticores, and wyverns from the Jotens regularly threaten the tranquility of both Sterich and the Yeomanry. Rushmoors. Hungry black dragons, otyughs, and other monsters haunt the Rushmoors. # Western Flanaess Survivors of the Invoked Devastation that destroyed the ancient Baklunish empire settled the temperate prairies, forests, and coastal lands of the Western Flanaess about a thousand years ago. Largely separated from the rest of the Flanaess by the Yatils, the Barrier Peaks, and the Crystal- mist Mountains, these realms are a stronghold of Baklunish cultures. The nations of Ekbir, Tusmit, and Zeif represent the heart of the region, and two rivers---the Blashik- mund and the Tuflik---form natural borders between them. Although the nations currently enjoy peace- ful relations, Tusmit profits by playing its political neighbors against each other---Ekbir against Zeif, Zeif against the Ulakandar nomads, the Ulakandar nomads against Ket, and so forth. Pasha Qharlan Sylba of Tusmit is careful to keep his name well - - ill:, & WESTERN FLANAESS LOCATIONS Location Dry Steppes, the Ekbir, the Sultanate of Ruler Sultan Xargun II (aasimar) Ket Beygraf Zoltana Lhaz (human) Plains of the Various Ulakandar clan Ulakandar, the Sea of Dust, the Tusmit, the Pashalik of leaders Pasha Qharlan Sylba (human) Orakhan Drasika Borinok (human) Ull Sultan Naxas Murad (human) Zeif, the Sultanate of clear of these schemes so he can avoid embroiling Tusmit in open warfare. But Tusmit's spies are cur- rently causing discord by spreading rumors that Zeif is planning to invade Ekbir. Ekbir's sultan be- lieves the rumors are true and is readying his army. Sultan Naxas Murad of Zeif is a reclusive man, a great philosopher, and a stern father figure to the rulers of Ekbir and Tusmit. Over the years, advisers and family members have urged Naxas to expand Zeif's borders through military conquest, but he re- fuses to do so, citing failed land grabs by kingdoms through history as proof that imperial expansion across the Flanaess rarely ends well. # Western Flanaess Culture The culture of the Western Flanaess preserves many of the ways and traditions of the ancient Baklunish empire. Enormous value is placed on the virtues of hospitality and generosity, particularly almsgiving and pious donations to temples and clergy. Since the fall of their ancient empire, the people of the Western Flanaess have demonstrated more interest in trade---as a way of amassing power and wealth, but also as a means of connecting and coexisting with neighbors---than in imperial expan- sion or military domination. The clothing favored by the people of the Western Flanaess features bright patterns in vibrant colors, worn in flowing gowns, robes, and long coats worn with breeches. Their cuisine is renowned for its rich flavors and spiciness. WESTERN FLANAESS AND ITs NEIGHBORS Ket is the crossroads between the Western Flanaess and the rest of the continent, nestled between the Yatil Mountains and Barrier Peaks. Though it was founded by Baklunish settlers, Ket's proximity to Description Desert where the Baklunish empire once stood Monarchy in an uneasy peace with its neighbors, bracing for a rumored invasion from Zeif Crossroads region Land of the Ulakandar nomads, who roam between the Dry Steppes and the border of Zeif Wasteland where the Suel Imperium once stood Monarchy profiting by playing its neighbors against each other Independent fiefdom founded by Ulakandar nomads who settled the land Monarchy ruled by a reclusive philosopher who resists his advisers' call to imperial expansion both Bissel (and the lands of Old Keoland) and Ve- luna (and the Central Flanaess) makes it a vibrant, multicultural land rich from extensive trade. Its culture reflects the breadth of its trade, including sizable populations of dragonborn and tieflings and displaying a fusion of Baklunish and Oeridian influ- ence. This mixture is visible in the title of its ruler, which is a combination of a Baklunish title (bey) and an Oeridian one (graf). The beygraf is a noble chosen by the lords of Lopolla's wealthiest, most influential families. Many of these lords also serve as generals in the Kettish military. The current beygraf, Zoltana Lhaz, is a skilled diplomat who so far has balanced the interests of different forces both inside her nation and among her neighbors. # Western Flanaess Adventures The political and mercantile intrigue among Ekbir, Tusmit, and Zeif provides abundant adventure op- portunities for characters in the Western Flanaess. A campaign focused around intrigue or mystery (see "Flavors of Fantasy" in this chapter) works par- ticularly well in this region. Of course, the Western Flanaess has its fair share of monsters, dungeons, and ruins as well. The ruins of the Baklunish Empire in the Dry Steppes, and those of the Suel Imperium in the Sea of Dust, attract plenty of adventurers as well as villains hoping to claim the magical knowledge that caused the terrible catastrophes leading to the fall of those em- pires. Ket and UIl, too, suffer from the depredations of the monsters in the Barrier Peaks and the Yatil Mountains, just as their eastern neighbors do. # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK A Twe Laoy or Pain APPEARS WITHOUT WARNING IN THE BUSTLING STREETS oF Sisu, ANO THE CITY'S RESIDENTS GET OUT OF HER WAY. et i ae # Chapter 6 COSMOLOGY immense cosmos. Most campaigns and adventures play out on worlds on the Material Plane. The rest of the multiverse consists of different planes of existence defined in relation to the Material Plane. The planes of existence are strange and often dan- gerous environments undreamed of in the natural world. Adventurers can stroll along streets of fire, test their mettle on battlefields where the fallen are resurrected with each dawn, and behold the terrify- ing majesty of the Lady of Pain as she floats above the streets of the ring-shaped city at the center of the multiverse. # The Planes The planes of existence are realms of myth and mystery. They're not simply other worlds, but dimensions formed and governed by spiritual and elemental principles. They fall into the following categories: Material Realms. Most D&D worlds are located on the Material Plane, which has two planar echoes: the Feywild and the Shadowfell. Transitive Planes. The Ethereal Plane and the Astral Plane are boundless realms that provide passage between other planes of existence. Inner Planes. The four Elemental Planes (Air, Earth, Fire, and Water), plus the Para-elemental Planes between them, are the Inner Planes. Outer Planes. Seventeen Outer Planes correspond to the nine alignments and shades of philosophical difference between them. Positive and Negative Planes. These two planes enfold the rest of the cosmology, providing the raw forces of life and death that underlie all exis- tence in the multiverse. T HE WORLDS OF D&D ARE PART OF AN # The Great Wheel The default D&D cosmology includes more than two dozen planes, detailed in this chapter. The most common understanding of these planes visualizes them as a group of concentric wheels, with the material realms at the center. The Inner Planes form a wheel around the Material Plane, enveloped in the Ethereal Plane. Then the Outer Planes form another wheel around and behind (or above or below) that one, arranged according to alignment, with the Outlands linking them all. Since the primary way of traveling from plane to plane is through magical portals, the spatial rela- tionship between different planes is largely theoret- ical. No being in the multiverse can look down and see the planes arranged like a diagram in a book. No mortal can verify whether Mount Celestia is sand- wiched between Bytopia and Arcadia; rather, this theoretical positioning is based on the philosophical shading among the three planes and the relative im- portance they give to law and good. OTHER CONFIGURATIONS For your campaign, you can use a different model of the planes. Here are several examples: - Planes situated among the roots and branches of a great cosmic tree (literally or figuratively) - Material realms suspended between two other re- alities: the astral realms (the Astral Plane and the Outer Planes) above and the elemental realms (the Inner Planes) below - A cosmology with fewer planes: a Material Plane; the Transitive Planes; a single undifferentiated Elemental Plane, where all four elements churn in chaos; an Overheaven, where good deities and Celestials dwell; and an Underworld, where evil deities and Fiends reside - Planes arranged in a complex system of orbits, with planes exerting greater influence on the Material Plane the closer they draw to it # Material Realms The Material Plane is where the philosophical and elemental forces of the other planes of existence collide in the jumbled existence of mortal life and matter. It is a thoroughly magical place, reflected in the two planes that share its central place in the multiverse. The Feywild and the Shadowfell are parallel di- mensions occupying the same cosmological space as the Material Plane. The landscapes of these three planes are similar, but those of the Feywild are more marvelous and whimsical, while those of the Shadowfell are more bleak and ominous. Passage between the Material Plane and these other realms is sometimes effortless, even accidental. Adven- turers might enter a grove of trees on the Material Plane and suddenly find themselves in a lush, col- orful forest on the Feywild or a grim wood of dead trees on the Shadowfell. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 173 re reat ¢ = mien tr 174 # Inner Planes The Inner Planes surround the Material Plane and its echoes, providing the raw elemental sub- stance from which all worlds were made. The four Elemental Planes---Air, Earth, Fire, and Water--- form a ring around the Material Plane. The bor- der regions between these planes are sometimes described as distinct planes in their own right: the Para-elemental Planes. These realms exemplify the physical essence and elemental nature of air, earth, fire, and water. The entire substance of the Elemental Plane of Fire, for example, is suffused with the fundamental nature of fire: energy, passion, transformation, and destruc- tion. Even objects of solid brass or basalt seem to dance with flame in a manifestation of the vibrancy of fire's dominion. At their innermost edges, where they are concep- tually closest to the Material Plane, the four Ele- mental Planes and the four Para-elemental Planes resemble places on the Material Plane. The four elements mingle together as they do on the Material Plane, forming land, sea, and sky. But the dominant element strongly influences the environment, alter- ing those locations' fundamental qualities. The inhabitants of this inner ring include aarako- cra, azers, dragon turtles, gargoyles, genies, lizard- folk, mephits, salamanders, and xorn. Some orig- inated on the Material Plane, and all can travel to the Material Plane (if they have access to the magic required) and survive there. As the Elemental Planes extend farther from the Material Plane, they become increasingly unstable and hostile. In the outer regions, the elements exist in their purest form: great expanses of solid earth, blazing fire, crystal-clear water, and unsullied air. Any foreign substance is extremely rare; little air can be found in the outer reaches of the Plane of Earth, and earth is all but impossible to find in the outer reaches of the Plane of Fire. These areas are much less hospitable to travelers from the Material Plane than the border regions are. Such regions are little known, so one who mentions the Plane of Fire, for example, usually means the border region. The outer regions are the domains of creatures formed of the pure elements, including air, earth, fire, and water elementals. These are also the do- mains of the Elemental Princes of Evil---primordial beings of pure elemental fury. At the outermost extents of the Elemental Planes, the pure elements dissolve and bleed together into an unending tumult of clashing energies and colliding substance called the Elemental Chaos. Elementals can be found here as well, but they usu- ally don't stay long, preferring the comfort of their native planes. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY # Outer Planes If the Inner Planes are the raw matter and energy that make up the multiverse, the Outer Planes provide the direction, thought, and purpose for its construction. These are realms of spirituality and thought, the spheres where Celestials, Fiends, and deities dwell. The plane of Elysium, for example, isn't merely a home for good creatures or where spirits of good creatures go when they die. It is the embodiment of goodness, a spiritual realm where evil can't abide. It is as much a state of being and of mind as it is a physical location. When discussing anything to do with deities and their realms, the language used must be highly metaphorical. Their actual homes aren't literally places at all but exemplify the idea that the Outer Planes are realms of thought and spirit. The planes with an element of good in their na- ture are called the Upper Planes, while those with an element of evil are the Lower Planes. A plane's alignment (as shown in the Outer Planes table) is its essence, and a creature whose alignment doesn't match the plane's alignment experiences a sense of dissonance there. When a good creature visits Ely- sium, for example, it feels in tune with the plane, but an evil creature feels uncomfortable, Outer PLANES Outer Plane Alignment Abyss Chaotic Evil Acheron Lawful Evil, Lawful Neutral Arborea Chaotic Good Arcadia Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral Beastlands Chaotic Good, Neutral Good Bytopia Lawful Good, Neutral Good Carceri Chaotic Evil, Neutral Evil Elysium Neutral Good Gehenna Lawful Evil, Neutral Evil Hades Neutral Evil Limbo Chaotic Neutral Mechanus Lawful Neutral Mount Celestia Lawful Good Nine Hells Lawful Evil Outlands Neutral Pandemonium Chaotic Evil, Chaotic Neutral Ysgard Chaotic Good, Chaotic Neutral The Upper Planes are the home of Celestials. The Lower Planes are the home of Fiends. The planes in between host their own unique denizens: for exam- ple, modrons are Constructs that inhabit Mechanus, and slaadi are Aberrations that thrive in Limbo. s s = ECSTASY, TRADEGATE g a EXCELSIOR --- z y =SYLVANIA FORTITUDE \< f GLORIUM wa Auromara ---. Ricus tes sayy Pca TORCH 176 aise} ee bs As with the Elemental Planes, one can imagine the perceptible part of the Outer Planes as a border region, while extensive spiritual regions lie beyond ordinary sensory experience. Even in perceptible regions, appearances can be deceptive. Initially, an Outer Plane might appear hospitable and familiar to natives of the Material Plane. But the landscape can change at the whim of a deity or other powerful forces that dwell on the plane, which can remake the realm completely, erasing and rebuilding exis- tence to better fulfill those forces' needs. Distance is a virtually meaningless concept on the Outer Planes. A perceptible region of a plane might seem quite small on one visit, and on another trip it can stretch on to what seems like infinity. Adventurers could take a guided tour of the Nine Hells, from the first layer to the ninth, in a single day---if the powers of the Nine Hells desire it. Or it could take weeks for travelers to make a grueling trek across a single layer.