# CHAPTER \| TREASURE 254 DRAGON Scare Man DIMENSIONAL SHACKLES Wondrous Item, Rare You can take a Utilize action to place these shackles on a creature that has the Incapacitated condition. The shackles adjust to fit a creature of Small to Large size. The shackles prevent a creature bound by them from using any method of extradimen- sional movement, including teleportation or travel to a different plane of existence. They don't prevent the creature from passing through an interdimen- sional portal. You and any creature you designate when you use the shackles can take a Utilize action to remove them. Once every 30 days, the bound creature can make a DC 30 Strength (Athletics) check. On a suc- cessful check, the creature breaks free and destroys the shackles. DRAGON SCALE MAIL Armor (Scale Mail), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) Dragon Scale Mail is made of the scales of one kind of dragon. Sometimes dragons collect their cast-off scales and gift them. Other times, hunters carefully preserve the hide of a dead dragon. In either case, Dragon Scale Mail is highly valued. While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class, you have Advantage on saving throws against the breath weapons of Dragons, and you have Resistance to one damage type determined by the kind of dragon that provided the scales (see the accompanying table). Additionally, you can focus your senses as a Magic action to discern the distance and direction to the closest dragon within 30 miles of yourself that is of the same type as the armor. This action can't be used again until the next dawn. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE # Dimensional Shackles DRAGON ScaveR (Greatsworo) Dreao Mem Dragon Resistance Dragon Resistance Black Acid Gold Fire Blue Lightning Green Poison Brass Fire Red Fire Bronze Lightning Silver Cold Copper Acid White Cold DRAGON SLAYER Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rare You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. The weapon deals an extra 3d6 damage of the weapon's type if the target is a Dragon. DREAD HELM Wondrous Item, Common While you're wearing this fearsome steel helm, your eyes glow red and the rest of your face is hidden in shadow. DRIFTGLOBE Wondrous Item, Uncommon This small sphere of thick glass weighs 1 pound. If you are within 60 feet of it, you can command it to emanate light equivalent to that of the Light or Daylight spell (your choice). Once used, the Daylight effect can't be used again until the next dawn. You can issue another command as a Magic ac- tion to make the illuminated globe rise into the air and float no more than 5 feet off the ground. The globe hovers in this way until you or another crea- ture grasps it. If you move more than 60 feet from DriFrG.ose the hovering globe, it follows you until it is within 60 feet of you. It takes the shortest route to do so. If prevented from moving, the globe sinks gently to the ground and becomes inactive, and its light winks out. Dust OF DISAPPEARANCE Wondrous Item, Uncommon This powder resembles fine sand. There is enough of it for one use. When you take a Utilize action to throw the dust into the air, you and each creature and object within a 10-foot Emanation originating from you have the Invisible condition for 2d4 min- utes. The duration is the same for all subjects, and the dust is consumed when its magic takes effect. Immediately after an affected creature makes an at- tack roll, deals damage, or casts a spell, the Invisible condition ends for that creature. Dust OF DRYNESS Wondrous Item, Uncommon This small packet contains 1d6 + 4 pinches of dust. As a Utilize action, you can sprinkle a pinch of the dust over water, turning up to a 15-foot Cube of water into one marble-sized pellet, which floats or rests near where the dust was sprinkled. The pellet's weight is negligible. A creature can take a Utilize action to smash the pellet against a hard surface, causing the pellet to shatter and release the water the dust absorbed. Doing so destroys the pellet and ends its magic. As a Utilize action, you can sprinkle a pinch of the dust on an Elemental within 5 feet of yourself that is composed mostly of water (such as a Water Elemental or a Water Weird). Such a creature exposed to a pinch of the dust makes a DC 13 Dwarven Pare Le Dust oF DisapreaRance Dust oF SNEEZING ANO CHOKING Constitution saving throw, taking 10d6 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Dust OF SNEEZING AND CHOKING Wondrous Item, Uncommon Found in a small container, this powder resembles Dust of Disappearance, and Identify reveals it to be such. There is enough of it for one use. As a Utilize action, you can throw the dust into the air, forcing yourself and every creature in a 30- foot Emanation originating from you to make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. Constructs, Elemen- tals, Oozes, Plants, and Undead succeed on the save automatically. On a failed save, a creature begins sneezing un- controllably; it has the Incapacitated condition and is suffocating. The creature repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. The effect also ends on any creature targeted by a Lesser Restoration spell. DWARVEN PLATE Armor (Half Plate or Plate Armor), Very Rare While wearing this armor, you gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class. In addition, if an effect moves you against your will along the ground, you can take a Reaction to reduce the distance you are moved by up to 10 feet. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 255 Erreeri CHAIN E.ven Cyain Erreeri Borme CHAPTER \| TREASURE # Dwarven Thrower Weapon (Warhammer), Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Dwarf or a Creature Attuned to a Belt of Dwarvenkind) You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. It has the Thrown property with a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. When you hit with a ranged at- tack using this weapon, it deals an extra 1d8 Force damage, or an extra 2d8 Force damage if the target is a Giant. Immediately after hitting or missing, the weapon flies back to your hand. EAR HoRN OF HEARING Wondrous Item, Common While held up to your ear, this horn suppresses the effects of the Deafened condition on you. EFREETI BOTTLE Wondrous Item, Very Rare When you take a Magic action to remove the stop- per of this painted brass bottle, a cloud of thick smoke flows out of it. At the end of your turn, the smoke disappears with a flash of harmless fire, and an Efreeti appears in an unoccupied space within 30 feet of you. The first time the bottle is opened, the DM rolls on the following table to determine what happens. 1d10 Effect 1 The efreeti attacks you. After fighting for 5 rounds, the efreeti disappears, and the bottle loses its magic. 2-9 The efreeti understands your languages and obeys your commands for 1 hour, after which it returns to the bottle, and a new stopper contains it. The stopper can't be re- moved for 24 hours. The next two times the bottle is opened, the same effect occurs. If the bottle is opened a fourth time, the efreeti escapes and disappears, and the bottle loses its magic. 10 'The efreeti understands your languages and can cast Wish once for you. It disappears when it grants the wish or after 1 hour, and the bottle loses its magic. ELEMENTAL Gems i ------ SS # Efreeti Chain Armor (Chain Mail or Chain Shirt), Legendary (Requires Attunement) While wearing this armor, you gain a +3 bonus to Armor Class, you have Immunity to Fire damage, and you know Primordial. In addition, you can stand on and move across molten rock as if it were solid ground. ELEMENTAL GEM Wondrous Item, Uncommon This gem contains a mote of elemental energy. When you take a Utilize action to break the gem, an elemental is summoned (see the Monster Manual for its stat block), and the gem ceases to be magical. The elemental appears in an unoccupied space as close to the broken gem as possible, understands your languages, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears after 1 hour, when it dies, or when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The type of gem determines the elemental, as shown in the following table. Gem Summoned Elemental Blue sapphire \_Air Elemental Emerald Water Elemental Red corundum Fire Elemental Yellow diamond Earth Elemental ELIxir OF HEALTH Potion, Rare When you drink this potion, you are cured of all magical contagions. In addition, the following con- ditions end on you: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed, and Poisoned. The clear, red liquid has tiny bubbles of light in it. ELVEN CHAIN Armor (Chain Mail or Chain Shirt), Rare You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class while you wear this armor. You are considered trained with this armor even if you lack training with Medium or Heavy armor. ENDURING SPELLBOOK Wondrous Item, Common This spellbook, along with anything written on its pages, can't be damaged by fire or water. In addi- tion, the spellbook doesn't deteriorate with age. ENERGY Bow Weapon (Longbow or Shortbow), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon, which has no string. Each time you pull your arm back in a firing motion, a magical arrow made of golden energy appears nocked and ready to fire. An arrow produced by this weapon deals Force damage instead of Pierc- ing damage on a hit, and it disappears after it hits or misses its target. Until it disappears, the arrow emits Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. This weapon has the following additional properties. Arrow of Restraint. Whenever you use this weapon to make a ranged attack against a creature, you can try to restrain the target instead of dealing damage to it. If the arrow hits, the target must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or have the Restrained condition for 1 minute. As an action, a creature Restrained by an arrow can make a DC HANK ORAWS HIS Enercy Bow # CHAPTER \| TREASURE > sl 4 20 Strength (Athletics) check to try to break the restraint, ending the effect on itself on a successful check. Arrow of Transport. As a Magic action, you can fire one energy arrow from this weapon at a target you can see within 60 feet of yourself. The target can be either a willing Medium or smaller creature or an object that isn't being worn or carried, pro- vided the object is small enough to fit inside a 5-foot Cube. The arrow teleports the target to an unoccu- pied space you can see within 10 feet of you. Energy Ladder. As a Magic action, you can loose a flurry of energy arrows from this weapon at a wall up to 60 feet away from yourself. The arrows be- come glowing rungs that stick out of the wall, form- ing a magical ladder up to 60 feet long on the wall. This ladder lasts for 1 minute before disappearing. ENSPELLED ARMOR Armor (Any Light, Medium, or Heavy), Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement) Bound into this armor is a spell of level 8 or lower. The spell is determined when the armor is created and must belong to the Abjuration or Illusion school of magic. The armor has 6 charges and regains 1d6 expended charges daily at dawn. While wearing the armor, you can expend 1 charge to cast its spell. The level of the spell bound into the armor deter- mines the spell's saving throw DC and attack bonus, as well as the armor''s rarity, as shown in the follow- ing table. Spell Level Rarity Save DC Attack Bonus Cantrip Uncommon 13 +5 1 Uncommon 13 +5 2 Rare 13 +5 3 Rare 15 +7 4 Very Rare 15 +7 5 Very Rare 7 +9 6 Legendary 7 +9 7 Legendary 18 +10 8 Legendary 18 +10 co ENSPELLED STAFF Staff, Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) Bound into this staff is a spell of level 8 or lower. The spell is determined when the staff is created and can be of any school of magic. The staff has 6 é \< charges and regains 1d6 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the staff, you can expend 1 charge to cast its spell. If you expend the staff's last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the staff loses its proper- ties and becomes a nonmagical Quarterstaff. The level of the spell bound into the staff deter- mines the spell's saving throw DC and attack bonus, as well as the staff's rarity, as shown in the follow- ing table. Spell Level Rarity Save DC Attack Bonus Cantrip Uncommon 13 +5 1 Uncommon 13 +5 2 Rare 13 +5 3 Rare 15 +7 4 Very Rare 15 +7 5 Very Rare 7 +9 6 Legendary V7 +9 7 Legendary 18 +10 8 Legendary 18 +10 ENSPELLED WEAPON Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rarity Varies (Requires Attunement) Bound into this weapon is a spell of level 8 or lower. The spell is determined when the weapon is created and must belong to the Conjuration, Divination, Evocation, Necromancy, or Transmutation school of magic. The weapon has 6 charges and regains 1d6 expended charges daily at dawn. While holding the weapon, you can expend 1 charge to cast its spell. The level of the spell bound into the weapon de- termines the spell's saving throw DC and attack bo- nus, as well as the weapon's rarity, as shown in the following table. Spell Level Rarity SaveDC Attack Bonus Cantrip Uncommon 13 +5 1 Uncommon 13 +5 2 Rare 13 +5 3 Rare 15 +7 4 Very Rare 15 +7 5 Very Rare V7 +9 6 Legendary 7 +9 7 Legendary 18 +10 8 Legendary 18 +10 ERSATZ EYE Wondrous Item, Common This magical eye replaces a real one that was lost or removed. While the Ersatz Eye is embedded in your eye socket, you can see through the tiny orb as though it were your natural eye. You can insert or remove the Ersatz Eye as a Magic action, and it can't be removed against your will while you are alive. EVERSMOKING BOTTLE Wondrous Item, Uncommon As a Magic action, you can open or close this bottle. Opening the bottle causes thick smoke to billow out, forming a cloud that fills a 60-foot Emanation originating from the bottle. The area within the smoke is Heavily Obscured. Each minute the bottle remains open, the size of the Emanation increases by 10 feet until it reaches its maximum size of 120 feet. Closing the bottle causes the cloud to become fixed in place until it disperses after 10 minutes. A strong wind (such as that created by the Gust of Wind spell) disperses the cloud after 1 minute. EXECUTIONER'S AXE Weapon (Battleaxe, Greataxe, Halberd, or Handaxe), Very Rare You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. Any Humanoid you hit with the weapon takes an extra 2d6 Slashing damage, and you gain Tempo- rary Hit Points equal to the extra damage dealt. EYE AND HAND OF VECNA Wondrous Item, Artifact (Requires Attunement) Vecna was a mighty Wizard who, through magic and conquest, forged a terrible empire. For all his power, however, Vecna feared death and took steps to prevent his demise by becoming a lich. A treacherous lieutenant named Kas brought Vecna''s rule to an end in a terrible battle. Of Veena, all that remained were one hand and one eye, grisly Artifacts that still seek to work Vecna's will in the world. The Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Vecna are sep- arate Artifacts that might be found together or separately. The eye looks like a bloodshot organ torn free from the socket. The hand is a shriveled left extremity. EVERSMOKING Borrme Random Properties of the Eye and Hand. The Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Vecna each have the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - | minor beneficial property - 1 major beneficial property - 1 minor detrimental property Attuning to the Eye. To attune to the eye, you must press it into your empty socket. The eye grafts itself to your head and remains there until you die. If the eye is ever removed, you die. Properties of the Eye. While you are attuned to the eye, your alignment is Neutral Evil, and you gain the following benefits: Truesight. You have Truesight out to 240 feet. Spellcasting. The eye has 8 charges and regains 1d4 + 4 expended charges daily at dawn. You can cast a spell on the Eye of Vecna Spells table from the eye (save DC 18). The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Each time you cast a spell from the eye, there is a 5 per- cent chance that Vecna tears your soul from your body, devours it, and then takes control of the body like a puppet. If that happens, you become an NPC under the DM's control. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 259 Eve of Vecna Eve oF VECNA SPELLS Spell Charge Cost Clairvoyance 2 Crown of Madness 1 Disintegrate 4 Dominate Monster 5 Eyebite 4 X-ray Vision. You can take a Magic action to gain X-ray vision with a range of 30 feet for 1 minute. To you, solid objects within that radius appear transparent and don't prevent light from passing through themselves. The vision can penetrate 1 foot of stone, 1 inch of common metal, or up to 3 feet of wood or dirt. Thicker substances block the vision, as does a thin sheet of lead. Attuning to the Hand. To attune to the hand, you must press it against the stump where your left hand was. The hand grafts itself to your arm and becomes a functioning appendage. If the hand is ever removed, you die. Properties of the Hand. When you are attuned to the hand, your alignment is Neutral Evil, and you gain the following benefits: Great Strength. Your Strength becomes 20 unless it is already 20 or higher. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Icy Touch. Any melee spell attack you make with the hand and any melee attack made witha weapon held by it deals an extra 2d8 Cold damage on a hit. Spellcasting. The hand has 8 charges and regains 1d4 + 4 expended charges daily at dawn. You can cast a spell on the Hand of Veena Spells table from the hand (save DC 18). The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Each time you cast a spell from it, the hand casts Suggestion on you (save DC 18; no Concentration required), demanding that you commit an evil act. The hand might have a specific act in mind or leave it up to you. # Hand Of Vecna Spells Spell Charge Cost Finger of Death 5 Sleep 1 Slow 2 Teleport 3 Properties of the Eye and Hand. While attuned to both the hand and eye, you gain the following addi- tional benefits: Danger Sense. You have Advantage on Initiative rolls. Necrotic Reduction. As a Magic action, you can target one creature you can see within 5 feet of yourself. The target makes a DC 18 Constitution saving throw, taking 7d6 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature reduced to O Hit Points by this damage is transformed into green slime (see chap- ter 3) that covers the ground in its space, each 5-foot square of slime representing a separate patch, Nonmagical objects worn or carried by the target that are made of metal or organic material are destroyed by the slime. Poison Immunity. You have Immunity to Poison damage and the Poisoned condition. Regeneration. If you start your turn with at least 1 Hit Point, you regain 1d10 Hit Points. Wish. You can cast Wish. Once used, this property can't be used again until 30 days have passed. Destroying the Eye and Hand. If the Eye of Vecna and the Hand of Vecna are both attached to the same creature and that creature is slain by the Sword of Kas, both the eye and the hand burst into flame, turn to ash, and are destroyed. Any other attempt to destroy the eye or hand seems to work, but the Artifact reappears in one of Vecna's many hidden vaults, where it waits to be rediscovered. Eves or CHARMING EYES OF CHARMING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. They have 3 charges. While wearing them, you can expend 1 or more charges to cast Charm Person (save DC 13). For 1 charge, you cast the level 1 version of the spell. You increase the spell's level by one for each additional charge you expend. The lenses regain all expended charges daily at dawn. EYES OF MINUTE SEEING Wondrous Item, Uncommon These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. While wear- ing them, your vision improves significantly out to a range of 1 foot, granting you Darkvision within that range and Advantage on Intelligence (Investigation) checks made to examine something within that range. EYES OF THE EAGLE Wondrous Item, Uncommon These crystal lenses fit over the eyes. While wear- ing them, you have Advantage on Wisdom (Per- ception) checks that rely on sight. In conditions of clear visibility, you can make out details of even extremely distant creatures and objects as small as 2 feet across. FIGURINE OF WONDROUS POWER Wondrous Item, Rarity Varies A Figurine of Wondrous Power is a statuette small enough to fit in a pocket. If you take a Magic ac- tion to throw the figurine to a point on the ground within 60 feet of yourself, the figurine becomes a living creature specified in the figurine's description below. If the space where the creature would appear is occupied by other creatures or objects, or if there isn't enough space for the creature, the figurine doesn't become a creature. The creature is Friendly to you and your allies. It understands your languages, obeys your com- mands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. If you issue no commands, the creature defends itself but takes no other actions. The creature exists for a duration specific to each figurine. At the end of the duration, the creature reverts to its figurine form. It reverts to a figurine early if its creature form drops to O Hit Points or if you take a Magic action while touching the crea- ture to make it revert to figurine form. When the creature becomes a figurine again, its property can't be used again until a certain amount of time has passed, as specified in the figurine's description. Bronze Griffon (Rare). This bronze statuette is of a griffon rampant. It can become a Griffon for up to 6 hours. Once it has been used, it can't be used again until 5 days have passed. Ebony Fly (Rare). This ebony statuette, carved in the likeness of a horsefly, can become a Giant Fly (see the accompanying stat block) for up to 12 hours and can be ridden as a mount. Once it has been used, it can't be used again until 2 days have passed. Golden Lions (Rare). These gold statuettes of lions are always created in pairs. You can use one fig- urine or both simultaneously. Each can become a Lion for up to 1 hour. Once a lion has been used, it can't be used again until 7 days have passed. GIANT FLY Large Beast, Unaligned AC 1\] HP 19 (3d10 + 3) Speed 30 ft., Fly 60 ft. MOOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 14 +2 +2 Dex 13 +1 +\] Conl3 +\] +1 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa3 \~-4 -4 Initiative +1 (11) Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 \| Languages None CR 0 (XP 0; PB +2) X # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 261 FiGuRiNE OF FiGurineg oF Wonorous Power (Onyx Dos) Wondrous Power (Marsce Evepwanr) # Figurine Of Wondrous Power (Ossioian Sreco) Figurine of Wonorous Power (Esonvy Fiv) Figurines of Wonoraus Power (GoLoEN Lions) Ivory Goats (Rare). These ivory statuettes of goats Goat of Travail. This figurine can become a Giant are always created in sets of three. Each goat looks Goat for up to 3 hours. Once it has been used, it unique and functions differently from the others. can't be used again until 30 days have passed. Their properties are as follows: Marble Elephant (Rare). This marble statuette Goat of Terror. This figurine can become a Giant resembles a trumpeting elephant. It can become an Goat for up to 3 hours. The goat can't attack, but Elephant for up to 24 hours. Once it has been used, you can (harmlessly) remove its horns and use it can't be used again until 7 days have passed. them as weapons. One horn becomes a +! Lance, Obsidian Steed (Very Rare). This polished obsidian and the other becomes a +2 Longsword. Removing horse can become a Nightmare for up to 24 hours. a horn requires a Magic action, and the weapons The nightmare fights only to defend itself. Once it disappear and the horns return when the goat has been used, it can't be used again until 5 days reverts to figurine form. While you ride the goat, have passed. any Hostile creature that starts its turn within The figurine has a 10 percent chance each time a 50-foot Emanation originating from the goat you use it to ignore your orders, including a com- must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or mand to revert to figurine form. If you mount the have the Frightened condition for 1 minute, until nightmare while it is ignoring your orders, you you are no longer riding the goat, or until the goat and the nightmare are instantly transported to a reverts to figurine form. The Frightened creature random location on the plane of Hades, where the repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, nightmare reverts to figurine form. ending the effect on itself on a success. Once it Onyx Dog (Rare). This onyx statuette of a dog can succeeds on the save, a creature is immune to this become a Mastiff for up to 6 hours. The mastiff has effect for the next 24 hours. Once the figurine has an Intelligence of 8 and can speak Common. It also been used, it can't be used again until 15 days have has Blindsight with a range of 60 feet. Once it has passed, been used, it can't be used again until 7 days have Goat of Traveling. This figurine can become a passed. Large goat with the same statistics as a Riding Serpentine Owl (Rare). This serpentine statuette of Horse. It has 24 charges, and each hour or por- an owl can become a Giant Owl for up to 8 hours. tion thereof it spends in goat form costs 1 charge. The owl can communicate telepathically with you at While it has charges, you can use it as often as you any range if you and it are on the same plane of ex- wish, When it runs out of charges, it reverts to a istence. Once it has been used, it can't be used again figurine and can't be used again until 7 days have until 2 days have passed. passed, when it regains all expended charges. CHAPTER \| TREASURE FIGURINES OF Wonorous Power (Ivory Goats) Fiame TONGUE\ (Loncsworo) Figurine oF Wonorous Power (Serventine Ow.) Silver Raven (Uncommon). This silver statuette of a raven can become a Raven for up to 12 hours. Once it has been used, it can't be used again until 2 days have passed. While in raven form, the figurine grants you the ability to cast Animal Messenger on it. FLAME TONGUE Weapon (Any Melee Weapon), Rare (Requires Attunement) While holding this magic weapon, you can take a Bonus Action and use a command word to cause flames to engulf the damage-dealing part of the weapon. These flames shed Bright Light in a 40- foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 40 feet. While the weapon is ablaze, it deals an extra 2d6 Fire damage on a hit. The flames last until you take a Bonus Action to issue the command again or until you drop, stow, or sheathe the weapon. FOLDING BOAT Wondrous Item, Rare This object appears as a wooden box that measures 12 inches long, 6 inches wide, and 6 inches deep. It weighs 4 pounds and floats. It can be opened to store items inside. This item also has three com- mand words, each requiring a Magic action to use: First Command Word. The box unfolds into a Rowboat. Second Command Word. The box unfolds into a Keelboat. Frost Brano (Scimirar) Third Command Word. The Folding Boat folds back into a box if no creatures are aboard. Any objects in the vessel that can't fit inside the box remain outside the box as it folds. Any objects in the ves- sel that can fit inside the box do so. When the box becomes a vessel, its weight becomes that of a normal vessel its size, and anything that was stored in the box remains in the boat. Statistics for the Rowboat and Keelboat appear in the Player's Handbook. If either vessel is reduced to 0 Hit Points, the Folding Boat is destroyed. FrosT BRAND Weapon (Glaive, Greatsword, Longsword, Rapier, Scimitar, or Shortsword), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) When you hit with an attack roll using this magic weapon, the target takes an extra Id6 Cold damage. In addition, while you hold the weapon, you have Resistance to Fire damage. In freezing temperatures, the weapon sheds Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. When you draw this weapon, you can extinguish all nonmagical flames within 30 feet of yourself. Once used, this property can't be used again for 1 hour. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE i GAUNTLETS OF OGRE POWER Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) Your Strength is 19 while you wear these gauntlets. They have no effect on you if your Strength is 19 or higher without them. GEM OF BRIGHTNESS Wondrous Item, Uncommon This prism has 50 charges. While you are holding it, you can take a Magic action and use one of three command words to cause one of the following effects: First Command Word. The gem sheds Bright Light in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi- tional 30 feet. This effect doesn't expend a charge. It lasts until you take a Bonus Action to repeat the command word or until you use another function of the gem. Second Command Word. You expend 1 charge and cause the gem to fire a brilliant beam of light at one creature you can see within 60 feet of your- self. The creature must succeed on a DC 15 Con- stitution saving throw or have the Blinded condi- tion for 1 minute. The creature repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Third Command Word. You expend 5 charges and cause the gem to flare with intense light in a 30- foot Cone. Each creature in the Cone makes a saving throw as if struck by the beam created with the second command word. When all of the gem's charges are expended, the gem becomes a nonmagical jewel worth 50 GP. Groves or Missice SNARING Gem oF Brightness GEM OF SEEING Wondrous Item, Rare (Requires Attunement) This gem has 3 charges. As a Magic action, you can expend 1 charge. For the next 10 minutes, you have Truesight out to 120 feet when you peer through the gem. The gem regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. GIANT SLAYER Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Rare You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. When you hit a Giant with this weapon, the Giant takes an extra 2d6 damage of the weapon's type and must succeed on a DC 15 Strength saving throw or have the Prone condition. GLAMOURED STUDDED LEATHER Armor (Studded Leather Armor), Rare While wearing this armor, you gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. You can also take a Bonus Action to cause the armor to assume the appearance of a nor- mal set of clothing or some other kind of armor. You decide what it looks like---including color, style, and accessories---but the armor retains its normal bulk and weight. The illusory appearance lasts until you use this property again or doff the armor. GAUNTLETS OF Ocre Power CHAPTER \| TREASURE - era oe Ow a ere \ drt GLOVES OF MISSILE SNARING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) If you're hit by an attack roll made with a Ranged or Thrown weapon while wearing these gloves, you can take a Reaction to reduce the damage by 1d10 plus your Dexterity modifier if you have a free hand. If you reduce the damage to O, you can catch the ammunition or weapon if it is small enough for you to hold in that hand. GLOVES OF SWIMMING AND CLIMBING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing these gloves, you have a Climb Speed and a Swim Speed equal to your Speed, and you gain a +5 bonus to Strength (Athletics) checks made to climb or swim. GLOVES OF THIEVERY Wondrous Item, Uncommon These gloves are imperceptible while worn. While wearing them, you gain a +5 bonus to Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) checks. GOGGLES OF NIGHT Wondrous Item, Uncommon While wearing these dark lenses, you have Darkvi- sion out to 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision, wearing the goggles increases its range by 60 feet. Hammer oF THUNOERBOLTS GOGGLES OF Niemwr Hac Eye Wondrous Item, Uncommon A Hag Eye has 3 charges. While wearing or holding this item, you can expend 1 charge to cast Darkvision (targeting yourself only) or See Invisibility. The Hag Eye regains all expended charges daily at dawn. Coven Sensor. The Hag Eye is usually entrusted to a hag's minion for safekeeping and transport. As a Magic action, a hag who belongs to the coven that created the Hag Eye can see what the Hag Eye sees if the hag and the Hag Eye are on the same plane of ex- istence. This effect lasts as long as the hag maintains Concentration. Multiple hags in the coven can see through the Hag Eye simultaneously. Creating a Hag Eye. Only a hag coven can craft this item, which is made from a real eye coated in varnish and often fitted to a pendant or another wearable item. A hag coven can have only one Hag Eye at a time, and creating a new one requires all three members of the coven to perform a special rite. This rite takes 1 hour, and the hags can't perform it if one or more of them has the Incapacitated condition. If the hags take any other actions during this rite, the rite fails and ends. HAMMER OF THUNDERBOLTS Weapon (Maul or Warhammer), Legendary (Requires Attunement) You gain a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. The weapon has 5 charges. You can expend 1 charge and make a ranged attack with the weapon, hurling it as if it had the Thrown property with a normal range of 20 feet and a long range of 60 feet. Hac Eve GLoves or THIEVERY # CHAPTER \| TREASURE --------- 266 If the attack hits, the weapon unleashes a thunder- clap audible out to 300 feet. The target and every creature within 30 feet of it other than you must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving throw or have the Stunned condition until the end of your next turn. Immediately after hitting or missing, the weapon flies back to your hand. The weapon regains 1d4 + 1 expended charges daily at dawn. Giant's Bane. While you are attuned to the weapon and wearing either a Belt of Giant Strength or Gauntlets of Ogre Power to which you are also at- tuned, you gain the following benefits: Giants' Bane. When you roll a 20 on the d20 for an attack roll made with this weapon against a Giant, the creature must succeed on a DC 17 Constitu- tion saving throw or die. Might of Giants. The Strength score bestowed by your Belt of Giant Strength or Gauntlets of Ogre Power increases by 4, to a maximum of 30. Hat OF DISGUISE Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While wearing this hat, you can cast the Disguise Self spell. The spell ends if the hat is removed. # Hat Of Many Spells Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Wizard) This pointed hat has the following properties. Spellcasting Focus. While holding the hat, you can use it as a Spellcasting Focus for your Wizard spells. Any spell you cast using the hat gains a special So- matic component: you must reach into the hat and "pull" the spell out of it. Unknown Spell. While holding the hat, you can try to cast a level 1+ spell you don't know. The spell must be on the Wizard spell list, it must be of a level you can cast, and it can't have Material components costing more than 1,000 GP. Once you decide on the spell, you must expend a spell slot of the spell's level. Then, to determine whether you cast the spell, make an Intelligence (Arcana) check (DC 10 plus the spell's level). On a successful check, you cast the spell using its normal casting time, and you can't use this property again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. On a failed check, you fail to cast the spell and a random effect occurs instead, deter- mined by rolling on the following table. Any spell you cast from the hat uses your spell save DC and spell attack bonus. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 1d100 01-50 51-55 56-60 61-65 Effect You cast a random spell determined by rolling 1410: on a 1, Enlarge/Reduce (enlarge effect); on a 2, Enlarge/Reduce (reduce effect); on a 3, Faerie Fire; on a 4, Fireball: on a5, Gust of Wind; on a 6, Invisibility (cast on yourself); on a 7, Lightning Bolt; on an 8, Phantasmal Force; on a 9, Polymorph; on a 10, Stinking Cloud. You have the Stunned condition until the end of your next turn, believing something awesome just happened. A harmless swarm of butterflies fills a 10- foot Cube within 30 feet of yourself. The swarm disperses after 1 minute. You pull a nonmagical object out of the hat. Roll 1d4 to determine the object: on a1, a vial of Acid; on a 2, a flask of Alchemist's Fire; on a 3, a Crowbar; on a 4, a lit Torch. # Presto Creates A Lightning Bolt USING HIS Mat OF Many Species 1d100 66-70 71-75 76-80 81-85 86-90 91-95 96-00 Effect You suffer a bout of "magic sickness" and have the Poisoned condition for 1 hour. You have the Petrified condition until the end of your next turn. You pull a nonmagical object out of the hat. Roll 1d4 to determine the object: on a 1, a Dagger; on a 2, a Rope with a Grap- pling Hook tied to one end; on a 3, a bag of Caltrops; on a 4, a gem worth 50 GP. A creature appears in an unoccupied space as close to you as possible. The creature isn't under your control and acts as it nor- mally would, and it disappears after 1 hour or when it drops to 0 Hit Points. Roll 1d4 to determine the creature: on a 1, a Camel; on a 2, a Constrictor Snake; on a 3, an Ele- phant; on a 4, a Mule. A Hostile Swarm of Bats flies out of the hat, occupies your space, and attacks you. A vertical, 10-foot-diameter, two-way portal to another plane of existence opens in an unoccupied space within 30 feet of you and remains open until the end of your next turn. The DM determines where it leads. You pull a magic item out of the hat. Roll 1d6 to determine the item's rarity: on a 1-3, Common; on a 4-5, Uncommon; on a 6, Rare. The DM chooses the item, which dis- appears after 1 hour if it's not consumed or destroyed before then. Mat or Vermin Mat or HAT OF VERMIN Wondrous Item, Common This hat has 3 charges. While holding the hat, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge and summon your choice of a Bat, a Frog, or a Rat. The summoned creature magically appears in the hat and tries to get away from you as quickly as pos- sible. The creature is Indifferent toward you and other creatures, and it isn't under your control. It behaves as an ordinary creature of its kind and disappears after 1 hour or when it drops to 0 Hit Points. The hat regains all expended charges daily at dawn. Hat OF WIZARDRY Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement by a Wizard) This cone-shaped hat is adorned with moons and stars. While you are wearing it, you gain the follow- ing benefits. Spellcasting Focus. You can use the hat as a Spell- casting Focus for your Wizard spells. Unknown Spell. As a Magic action, you can try to cast a cantrip that you don't know. The cantrip must be on the Wizard spell list and have a casting time of an action, and you make a DC 10 Intelli- gence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you cast the spell. On a failed check, the spell fails, and the action used to cast the spell is wasted. In either case, you can't use this property again until you fin- ish a Long Rest. hat or Wirarory CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 267 268 MeaoBano oF INTELLECT Heim oF Brittiance HEADBAND OF INTELLECT Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) Your Intelligence is 19 while you wear this head- band. It has no effect on you if your Intelligence is 19 or higher without it. HELM OF BRILLIANCE Wondrous Item, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This helm is set with 1d10 diamonds, 2d10 rubies, 3d10 fire opals, and 4d10 opals. Any gem pried from the helm crumbles to dust. When all the gems are removed or destroyed, the helm loses its magic. You gain the following benefits while wearing the helm. Diamond Light. As long as it has at least one diamond, the helm emits a 30-foot Emanation. When at least one Undead is within that area, the Emanation is filled with Dim Light. Any Undead that starts its turn in that area takes 1d6 Radiant damage. Fire Opal Flames. As long as the helm has at least one fire opal, you can take a Magic action to cause one weapon you are holding to burst into flames. The flames emit Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. The flames are harmless to you and the weapon. When you hit with an attack using the blazing weapon, the target takes an extra 1d6 Fire damage. The flames last until you take a Bonus Action to extinguish them or until you drop or stow the weapon. Ruby Resistance. As long as the helm has at least one ruby, you have Resistance to Fire damage. Spells. You can cast one of the following spells (save DC 18), using one of the helm's gems of the specified type as a component: Daylight (opal),