7= Dungeon Master'S Pe ea) Ate --- a" ae # Dungeon Master's Guide CREDITS Lead Designers: Christopher Perkins, James Wyatt Designers: Jeremy Crawford, F. Wesley Schneider, Ray Winninger Rules Developers: jeremy Crawford (lead), Makenzie De Armas, Ben Petrisor Editors: Adrian Ng (lead), Judy Bauer, Janica Carter Playtest Analysts: Ron Lundeen (lead), Dan Dillon, Patrick Renie Art Directors: Kate Irwin (lead), Josh Herman Graphic Designers: Trish Yochum (lead), Matt Cole Cover Illustrators: Tyler Jacobson, Simen Meyer, Olena Richards Interior Illustrators: Helder Almeida, Joy Ang, David Astruga, Alfven Ato, Tom Babbey, Helge C. Balzer, Luca Bancone, Mark Behm, Eric Belisle, Olivier Bernard, Zoltan Boros, Bruce Brenneise, Aleksi Briclot, Ekaterina Burmak, Filip Burburan, Paul Scott Canavan, Dawn Carlos, Clint Cearley, Diana Cearley, Sidharth Chaturvedi, David René Christensen, Conceptopolis, Harry Conway, CoupleOfKooks, Daarken, Kent Davis, Nikki Dawes, Axel Defois, Alex Diaz, Simon Dominic, Olga Drebas, Wayne England, Aurore Folny, Jessica Fong, Vallez Gax, Justyna Gil, Ilse Gort, Alexandre Honoré, Ralph Horsley, Jason juta, Sam Keiser, Julian Kok, Katerina Ladon, Abigail Larson, Olly Lawson, Linda Lithen, Titus Lunter, Andrew Mar, Raluca Marinescu, Viko Menezes, Brynn Metheney, Robson Michel, Calder Moore, Martin Mottet, Jodie Muir, Scott Murphy, David Auden Nash, Irina Nordsol, William O'Connor, Robin Olausson, Claudio Pozas, Livia Prima, April Prime, Noor Rahman, Chris Rallis, Chris Seaman, Andrea Sip!, Craig \| Spearing, Chase Stone, Joel Thomas, Beth Trott, ON THE Cover Tyler Jacobson illustrates the archvillain Venger, his evil cohorts Skylla and Warduke, and a legion of skeletal minions. 620D3921000001 EN ISBN: 978-0-7869-6984-5 First Printing: November 2024 C€ cs 987654321 @ Brian Valeza, Cyril Van Der Haegen, Randy Vargas, Richard Whitters, Zuzanna Wuzyk, Kieran Yanner Cartographers: Francesca Baerald, Dyson Logos, Mike Schley Concept Art Director: Josh Herman Concept Artists: Even Amundsen, Carlo Arellano, Michael Broussard, John Grello, Tyler Jacobson, 9B Collective, Noor Rahman Consultants: Zac Clay, Jennifer Kretchmer, James Mendez, Matthew Mercer, Jonathan Tomhave, Alyssa Visscher, Deborah Ann Woll Additional Consultation: justice Ramin Arman, Kyle Brink, Amanda Hamon, jay Jani, Carl Sibley, Emi Tanji, Jason Tondro Producers: Dan Tovar (lead), Bill Benham, Siera Bruggeman, Robert Hawkey Print Operations Engineers: Basil Hale, Scott West Imaging Technicians: Daniel Corona, Meagan Kenreck, Kevin Yee Prepress Specialist: jefferson Dunlap Based on the Dungeon Master's Guide (2014) by Jeremy Crawford (co-lead), Christopher Perkins (co-lead), James Wyatt (co-lead), Peter Lee, Mike Mearls, Robert \|. Schwalb, Rodney Thompson Building on the original game created by Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson and then developed by many others over the past 50 years ON THE ALT-Cover Lolth, the Demon Queen of Spiders, spins a tangled web of schemes and snares in this illustration by Olena Richards. DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, D&D, Wizards of the Coast, the dragon ampersand, Dark Sun, Dragonlance, Eberron, Forgotten Realms, Greyhawk. Planescape, Ravenloft, Spelljammer, Player's Handbook, Monster Manual, Oungeon Master's Guide, Magic: The Gathering, all other Wizards of the Coast product names, their respective logos, and The World's Greatest Roleplaying Game are trademarks of Wizards of the Coast in the USA and other countries, All characters and their distinctive likenesses are property of Wizards of the Coast, This ma- terial is protected under the copyright laws of the United express written permission of Wizards of the Coast States of America. Any reproduction of unauthorized use of the material or artwork contained herein is prohibited without the Printed in the USA, ©2024 Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. Manufactured by: Hasbro SA, Rue Emile-Boéchat 31, 2800 Delémont. CH, Represented by Hasbro UK Ltd. PO Box 43 Newport, NP19 4YH, UK. Jew en anglais. CONTENU: 1 livre, 1 carte. Importé au Canada par Wizards of the Coast LLC, PO Box 707, Renton, WA 98057-0707, USA. FABRIQUE AUX ETATS-UNIS a - ee CONTENTS Chapter 1: The Basics....cccssscsses esssee 4 What Does a DM Do?.... Things You Need ERNE Example of Play... Every DM Is Unique... Ensuring Fun for All...... Mutual Respect....sscsssssesssssssssssersssssesensene Respect for the Players.. Respect for the DMinccosscsssesssscestmsseee 18 Chapter 2; Running the Game.............20 Kmow Yourr Playerss.n.sacsscsssssssesessssecsceseeseeseees 21 Group Size See 23 PUL tape Dig cise cscs 25 DIOR PREIOR sida terr ean 26 Resolving Outcomes... iia AF Ability Checks...... wou 27 Attack Rolls...... 29 Saving Throws... won OD) Consequence..rvsevs improvising Damage... an 30 Improvising Answers......... ee) \| Running Social Interaction... nooes OD Roleplaying..nvsovsosereeeserresnsvsnssresseseesneenenes 32 Attitude.. 0 OS Running Exploration... 33 Using a Map.......... ea FJ Tracking Time semoessossorsesseseen asaee O4 Actions in Exploration..cocsosorsesseene 34 Perception PREC OR CC \~o0 Travel 36 Running Combat eversessssseseeresesssssssssesseesanse 42 Rolling Initiative Tracking Initiative.....cssssssssssssssssssesessn 42 Tracking Monsters' Hit Points.........42 Using and Tracking Conditionas..........43 Miniatures........... 44 Tracking Position at Long Range.......45 Narration in COMmbat.secssssssseseseeeneess 46 Keeping Combat Moving........ we 47 Adjusting Difficulty. 48 Fight or Flight... eee 8 Character Advancement....csssssesernnsen 48 Chapter 3: DM's Toolbox.....cessecsseesen SO --- = peemert:} \| Chases... 52 Creating s a 'Background scetbaddahanbaaonastisied 55 Creating a Creature wc. Creating a Magic Item. ro Creating a Spelb c.cccssssosscssscsccssesermnsnnseeeeese Curses and Magical Contagions...........60 ETS PRRECEARERCER RNant vaet PUN oS ENT OC ERIE 62 Doors. ma 64 Dungeons. secs OSS Environmental Effects......cscssssensscsssssene 68 Fear and Mental Stress......sssocsssosessesoe 70 Firearms and Explosives.nesesossssssrnee 72 Gods and Other Powers...cccccscsscsscsscsseeses 74 FER ST os cticticinceressomgrsecre ees Marks of Prestige... Mobs Nonplayer Characters ot) \| Haaren Ecc are cers tree FEO! rereeeaseniemomeN. RenowN.neecccsessee CREATE. 7 Settlements... REDRESS Siege Equipment.......... wevees 96 Supernatural Gifts.......ssssssrssseeseeneere 9B 2), es 100 Chapter 4: Creating Adventures..... 104 Step-by-Step Adventures..evesssssssrsersersee Lay Out the Premise........csccccccccsccsssssseeeee Adventure Premise.......... Adventure Conflict ccssssssssssssssssssnsensee 106 Adventure Situations by Level.........106 Adventure Setting Draw In the Players..n.c0v0 Adventure Patrons...... Supernatural Hooks... Happenstance Hooks...... Plan Encounters wn. Character Objectives... 112 Keeping the Adventure Moving...... 112 Something for Everyone ues 113 Multiple Ways to Progress........ ee 113 Social Interaction Encounters........ Exploration Encounters...ccecmseme 114 Combat Encounters......... 114 Monster Behavior..scssessccsesscrsessesseseseseeee 116 Encounter Pace and Tension.. 118 Bring It to an End.....cnenessscsseeeree 120 Denouement............ a 120 Adventure Rewards... 120 Adventure Examples scsessssessssessssssensee 122 Chapter 5: Creating Campaigns...... 126 Step-by-Step Campaigns... 127 Your Campaign Journal. we 127 Campaign Premise......... veonee 29 Campaign Characters. eoessee 129 Campaign Conflicts..... Reverso \[5 \| Flavors of Fantasy........ eee ba Campaign Settimg...cecscsecevessrseseresses 136 Campaign Start..... clS7 Plan Adventures.............. Episodes and Serials.......... ia + 139 Getting Players Invested... 140 Time in the Campaign........ a 142 Ending a Campaign...-ccssssccsessesnnere 142 Greyhawk 143 Important Names...sccsccscsssssessseseseeues 143 Greyhawk 's Premise...vsssssssssssssssssses 143 Free City of Greyhawk... ww 149 Greyhawk Gazetteer..nsccesorssssesn 160 Chapter 6: Cosmology ovvscosssessssessseessees 172 BY \|, eT 7 £5 Planar Travel.......... 176 Planar Adventuring.uevsvsoorsesessenenessenem 178 Tour of the Multiverse.....csccsssoossssc we 180 Chapter 7: Treasure.....c:ccscsssersesesseeee 212 Treasure Themes......... Trade Bars we 213 Trade Goods 213 Gemstones we 214 Art Oblectanii eas Magic Items 216 Magic Item Categories... 216 Magic Item Rarity... acy 3 Y \| Awarding Magic Items... 218 Activating a Magic Item scene 218 "The Next Dawn.ccecsscsssssccssssssessccsessere 220 Cire FROME ierncssinrrsanscsrcrrcotcccniesscccsonen 220 Magic Item Resilience cesses 220 Crafting Magic Iter.accscssosssseseosseserrn.220 Magic Item Special Features.............222 Artifacts = 224 Sentient Magic Itemms...cssssssessssssssse suas ZO Gaining a Bastion.sscssssssssessseesevsssens 333 Bastion TUrnns..cessccscssereeesens a, \*.) Bastion Events... aa Fall Of & Bastion sescseoresseersersersensersersersersees 352 Appendix A: Lore Glossary.....010 354 Appendix B: Maps qesennntsomnnetsasee SOS Barrow Crypt een OS Caravan Encampment...ccsscssssseesersesseees 366 Crossroads Village....... 07 Dragon's Lair.. 368 Dungeon Hideout...cmesscssseesseeesnnnsessees 369 Farmstead..... 370 fe PARR ee ee eee te ea eRe DDO, 3 Mani0r cocrcises ee ce peas 372 Ne sis isiascinsinsin sistas Benen Ff\] Roadside Inn i Seen. F(- SSDI Sispeosseccia este eTPSONS EE viernes nen ABS fs) Spooky House... 3 76 Underdark Warren ey Volcanic Caves.......... 378 Wer S TOWER oxicnsccesasesssornsescorsvisotsessnisnivon 379 Index 380 Tracking Sheets Game Expectations...sssssssnseesessersnensensees 14 Travel Planner... NPC Tracker...scssesesse Settlement Tracker... sone OD Campaign Journal.....cscssess 128 DM's Character Trackerv..... eee F74) Campaign Conflicts........ ooeeees LOD Magic Item Tracker... ane B19 Bastion Trache tiiesacsssscsseressecvevecsousesoreine D993 a ee BUT WOULON'T IT BE FUN? # Chapter 1 # The Basics you and your friends take on roles and tell a shared story. While the Player's Handbook teaches you how to play the game and how to cre- ate characters who are the heroes of the story, the Dungeon Master's Guide is written for the player who presides over the game and makes sure everyone is having fun. This player is the Dungeon Master, or DM. Being a Dungeon Master is a fun, empowering, and rewarding experience, and this chapter walks you through the basics. WHat DoEs A DM Do? The DM gets to play many fun roles: D UNGEONS & DRAGONS IS A GAME IN WHICH Actor. The DM plays the monsters, choosing their actions and rolling dice for their attacks. The DM also plays all the people the characters meet. Director. Like the director of a movie, the DM de- cides (and describes) what the players' characters encounter in the course of an adventure. The DM is also responsible for the pace of a play session and for creating situations that facilitate fun. Improviser. A big part of being the DM is deciding how to apply the rules as you go and imagining the consequences of the characters' actions in a way that will make the game fun for everyone. Referee. When it's not clear what ought to happen next, the DM decides how to apply the rules. Storyteller. The DM crafts adventures, setting situ- ations in front of the characters that entice them to explore and interact with the game world. Teacher. It's often the DM's job to teach new players how to play the game. Worldbuilder. The DM creates the world where the game's adventures take place. Even if you're using a published setting, you get to make it yours. DM Tips The most important part of being a good DM is facilitating the fun of everyone at the table. Keep these tips in mind to help things go smoothly. Embrace the Shared Story. D&D is about telling a story as a group, so let the other players contrib- ute through the words and deeds of their charac- ters. Encourage players to engage by asking them what their characters are doing. It's Not a Competition. The DM isn't competing against the other players. It's your job to provide fun challenges and keep the story moving. Be Fair and Flexible. Treat your players in a fair, impartial manner. The rules help you do this, but when you need to act as referee, try to make deci- sions that ensure everyone is having fun. Communicate with Your Players. Open commu- nication is essential to a successful D&D game. Many problems can be solved or even prevented with honest conversation. Ask questions and so- licit feedback after or between sessions. It's OK to Make Mistakes. If you overlook or mis- represent something, correct yourself and move on. No one expects you to memorize every rule or detail. Even if you don't realize your mistake until after a game session is over, it's OK to acknowl- edge the mistake at the start of the next session and make adjustments moving forward. \<\< a What's NEW IN THE 2024 VERSION? This is the 2024 version of the fifth edition Dun- geon Master's Guide. Much of the book has been reorganized, expanded, and rewritten from the 2014 version, and the versions of things in this book replace versions from older books. Here are a few highlights: Sound Advice. Every chapter (but especially chap- ters 1, 2, 4, and 5) has new advice for Dungeon Masters of all experience levels. Tracking Sheets. Helpful sheets throughout the book give you tools to plan your game and keep track of your campaign. These sheets are also available on DnDBeyond.com. Encounter-Building Assistance. The rules for esti- mating the difficulty of combat encounters have changed, as you'll see in chapter 4. Ready-Made Elements. Sample adventures in chapter 4, a campaign setting in chapter 5, and new maps in appendix B make it easier to run a game right away. Expanded and Revised Magic Items. Chapter 7 is packed with new magic items and old ones that have been revised. Bastions. Chapter 8 has rules that allow player characters to build, maintain, and enjoy their own strongholds. Lore Glossary. In appendix A, a helpful glossary explains many of the iconic people and loca- tions found throughout the D&D multiverse. = og # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS 5 THINGS You NEED What you need to play hasn't changed much since the game's first publication in 1974. RULEBOOKS As the Dungeon Master, you need this book plus the Player's Handbook (which contains most of the rules of the game) and the Monster Manual. Your players need access to the Player's Handbook, too, but they can share as needed. Let players know beforehand what books (other than the Player's Handbook) they can reference during a playing session. For example, it's not ap- propriate for players to look up a monster in the Monster Manual (or the equivalent digital tool) while fighting that monster. If you're running a published adventure, players should avoid reading that adventure so they don't spoil any surprises. # A Dungeon Master One player has the special role of Dungeon Master. Some people love being the DM all the time, while others can end up feeling trapped as the "forever DM" for their gaming group. The "Group Size" sec- tion in chapter 2 discusses possibilities for sharing the role of Dungeon Master among multiple players in a group. PlayerS Players who aren't the Dungeon Master take on the roles of the heroes, also known as the characters or the adventurers. D&D plays best with four to six players in addition to the DM, but it's possible to run a game with fewer or more adventurers. See the "Group Size" section in chapter 2 for advice on doing so. FINDING PlayerS Where do you find players? Here are a handful of suggestions: - Game or hobby stores (the Store Locator on the Wizards of the Coast website can help you find stores near you that host D&D events) - Friends, family, community members, and work colleagues who enjoy gaming or fantasy - Gaming clubs at schools - Social media and online messaging sites - Gaming conventions # A Place To Play The bare minimum of space you need to play D&D is room for everyone in your group to gather and participate. When choosing the space you'll be playing in, en- list your players' help. Think about any accessibility # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS needs you or they might have. Some players might have difficulty with low light, background music, strong odors, cramped spaces, or specific allergens. Accommodate what you can; communicate what you can't as early as possible. If possible, play in an area with minimal visual or auditory distractions. Favor surroundings that rein- force your desired atmosphere and have little non- player traffic. If space is shared, reserve the space in advance. You can also play D&D anywhere you might come together in an online space, from a group video call to a sophisticated virtual tabletop. DICE You need a full set of polyhedral dice: d4, d6, d8, di0, d12, and d20. It's helpful to have at least two of each kind. Ideally, each player should also have their own set of polyhedral dice. Lots of digital dice rollers exist. Simple, browser- based dice rollers are easily found on the internet. Specialized dice apps can be found in app stores, and virtual tabletops typically have dice-rolling functionality built in. # Note-taking Materials Everyone needs some way to take notes. During ev- ery round of combat, someone needs to keep track of Initiative, Hit Points, conditions, and other infor- mation. Players often like to take notes about what happens in the adventure, and at least one of them should record any clues and treasure the characters collect. # Character Sheets Players need some way to record important infor- mation about their characters. Plain paper works fine, but players might find official or fan-made character sheets more helpful in organizing the i # Scheduling Games Sometimes the hardest thing about running a game is finding a time when everyone can play. Some groups play for a few hours every week, while others set aside a whole day once a month. Create a schedule that works best for your group. For new groups, it often helps to schedule a single-session game (often called a "one-shot") as a way for people to try it out. If everyone has a great time at that one session, it can be easier to get them to make a long-term commitment. Scheduling conflicts are sometimes inescap- able. The "Group Size" section in chapter 2 offers some advice on what to do when a player has to miss a session, information. A variety of digital character sheets are also available if you're playing online or using digital devices at the table. # Campaign Journal Throughout this book you'll find tracking sheets you can use to make your work as a DM easier. They range from sheets you can use to track NPCs or settlements in your game to trackers you can use to make sure you're giving the adventurers a good number of magic items. These tracking sheets can form the basis of a campaign journal (see chapter 5), and they'll help you plan your adventures and build your world. You can scan or photocopy these sheets for your personal use, and you'll find downloadable versions on DnDBeyond.com. UsEFUL ADDITIONS Various resources can enrich your game and make it more fun. Many of these resources might have digital versions, making computers, tablets, and smartphones essential elements in some D&D games and for some players. DM SCREEN A DM screen shields your books, notes, and die rolls from your players. (See the "Ensuring Fun for All" section later in this chapter for more about when and why you might want to hide die rolls.) Most DM screens have art on the outward-facing panels and handy rules information on the inside-facing panels. Others might be made of fancy wood or sculpted to help set the mood for your game. You don't need a physical screen to hide things if you're playing online, but it can be helpful to have ready access to important information like condi- tion definitions, common actions, and other key rules. Some DMs set up a physical DM screen near their computer screen. A virtual tabletop might have reference information like this built in. # Adventures And Sourcebooks Beyond the three core rulebooks, a plethora of ad- ditional content is available from Wizards of the Coast and other publishers. Adventures provide hooks, plots, maps, and encounters you can use in your game. Sourcebooks include things like new character options, new monsters, and inspira- tion for building your own adventures and campaigns. You can play D&D without any of these additional products, but many DMs (and players) find them to be exciting additions to the game. BATTLE GRID AND MINIATURES Some DMs use a battle grid and miniatures to run combat encounters, which helps players visualize scenes when playing in person. A vinyl wet-erase mat with a printed grid, a gridded whiteboard, a cutting mat, a large sheet of gridded paper, or a printed poster map---any of these can serve as a battle grid. The grid should be marked in I-inch squares. You also need plastic or metal miniatures to rep- resent characters and monsters in the game, but you can use coins, extra dice, paper counters, or even pieces of candy if miniatures are unavailable. Many software tools designed to facilitate online D&D play provide a battle grid. Even without such tools, though, many online D&D games use screen sharing in combination with drawing programs, shared whiteboards, or similar tools as simple battle grids. Some DMs are comfortable with software that allows them to control lighting and show the players exactly what they can see; others find that complex software gets in the way of the game. Use whatever works for you and your group. # Card Accessories Some players and DMs find it helpful to have infor- mation available in the form of cards. You can buy (or make) cards with individual spells, magic items, monster stat blocks, rules reference, and similar information for easy reference. WHAT DO YOU 00 WHEN A OIE LANDS COCKEO? SEE THE ENO OF THIS CHAPTER FOR ADVICE. # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS 7 PREPARING A SESSION The more you prepare before your game, the more smoothly the game will go---to a certain point. To avoid being either under- or overprepared, use the one-hour guideline below and prioritize what to prepare depending on the time you have available. THE ONE-Hour GUIDELINE A D&D game session usually starts with some out- of-game chatter as everyone settles down to play. Once the session gets underway, most groups can accomplish at least three things during one hour of play, where each "thing" might be any of the following: - Explore a location such as a chamber in a castle or a cave - Converse with an intelligent creature - Reach consensus on a divisive issue - Solve a tricky riddle or puzzle - Survive a deadly trap - Fight a low-difficulty combat encounter A more difficult combat encounter might count as two or three things, and a tense negotiation can use most or all of an hour of play on its own. # Preparation Time The following guidelines can help you prepare for a session of play using a published adventure. ONE-Hour PREPARATION If you spend one hour each week preparing for your game, follow these steps: Step 1. Focus on the story of the adventure. Read or reread the adventure's introduction and back- ground information. Create a bulleted list of key plot points to make sure a coherent story unfolds. Step 2. Identify the encounters you want to run, then figure out how likely it is each encounter will get played, categorizing each one as "definite," "possible," or "unlikely." Step 3. Gather any maps you'll need for the definite and possible encounters, then focus the remainder of your prep time on the definite encounters, as outlined below. For combat encounters, review the monsters' tactics and stat blocks. Note any special rules that apply to the setting of the encounter. For social interaction encounters, make notes about the nonplayer characters (NPCs) in the en- counter---their personalities, goals, and tactics, For exploration encounters, record any clues or other information the characters should learn, and review any special rules that might come into play in the encounter. # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS ON QUEEN oF Func # Can Carefully SWING CAMPAIGN! Step 4. Consider how each definite encounter re- lates to the players' motivations (see the "Know Your Players" section in chapter 2). Think about elements you can add to interest them. For exam- --- ple, a combat encounter could open with a tense negotiation designed to appeal to players who en- joy social interaction. Step 5. Skim the encounters you flagged as possible. Two-Hour PREPARATION With another hour to prepare, add these steps: Step 6. Carefully review each "possible" encounter. Step 7. Devote any time you have left to creating improvisational aids (see the "Improvising An- swers" section in chapter 2). THREE-HOurR PREPARATION If you have three hours to prepare, add these steps: Step 8. Skim each "unlikely" encounter. Step 9. Create a new encounter designed to appeal specifically to one player, or alter an existing en- counter to relate to the goals and motivations of that player's character. Over the course of several sessions, do this for all your players and their characters. we, How TO RUN A SESSION This section explains how to run a game session; later on, chapters 4 and 5 detail how to combine sessions into adventures and adventures into campaigns. RECAP Start each game session after the first with a recap of what happened in the previous session. A recap helps players get back into the story. It also provides important information to players who missed the previous session. You can provide this recap, or you can invite one or more players to deliver the recap instead, Each approach has benefits: DM Recap. Provide the recap yourself if you have specific information you need to impart or if you want the recap to be concise and focused on what's relevant. Player Recap. Let the players provide the recap if you want to gauge what they think is important or learn more about what they're getting out of the game. If the players miss any important details in their recap, you can interject a reminder. ENCOUNTERS The bulk of a typical D&D session consists of a se- ries of encounters, similar to how a movie is a series of scenes. In each encounter, there are chances for the DM to describe creatures and places and for characters to make choices. Encounters can involve exploration (interacting with the environment, in- cluding puzzles), social interaction with creatures, or combat. The Player's Handbook outlines the gen- eral rhythm of play in an encounter. The following sections offer more detailed information on how an encounter typically unfolds, in three steps. Step 1: DESCRIBE THE SITUATION As the DM, you decide how much to tell the players and when. All the information the players need to make choices comes from you, Within the rules of the game and the limits of the characters' knowl- edge and senses, tell players everything they need to know. Published adventures often include text in a box like this, which is meant to be read aloud to the players when their characters first arrive at a location or under a specific circumstance, as de- scribed in the text. It usually describes locations so the players know what's happening and have a sense of what their characters' options are. Whether you're running a published adventure or one of your own creation, your initial description of a room or situation should focus on what the char- acters can perceive. You don't have to reveal every detail at once. Most players begin to lose focus after about three sentences of descriptive text. As charac- ters search rooms, open drawers and chests, and ex- amine things more closely, give players more details about what their characters find. The "Narration" section in chapter 2 offers more extensive advice and examples of narration. Step 2: LET THE PlayerS TALK Once you're done describing the situation, ask the players what their characters want to do, Note what the players say, and identify how to resolve their ac- tions. Ask them for more information if you need it. Sometimes the players might give you a group answer: "We go through the door." Other times, individual players might want to do specific things--- one might search a chest while another examines a bookshelf. Outside combat, the characters don't need to take turns, but you need to give each player a chance to tell you what their character is doing so you can decide how to resolve everyone's actions. In combat, everyone takes turns in Initiative order. Step 3: DESCRIBE WHAT HAPPENS After the players describe their characters' actions, it's the DM's job to resolve those actions, guided by the rules and the adventure you've prepared. So how do you decide? Think through these possibilities: No Rules Required. Sometimes, resolving a situ- ation is easy. If an adventurer wants to cross an empty room and open a door, you can just say that the door opens and describe what lies beyond (perhaps referencing your map or notes). Obstacles to Success. A lock, a guard, or some other obstacle might hinder a character's ability to complete a task. In those cases, you typically call for a D20 Test, usually an ability check. For exam- ple, a successful Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check might be needed to pick the lock, while a success- ful Charisma (Persuasion) check and some coins might be needed to bribe the guard. The "Resolv- ing Outcomes" section in chapter 2 gives more guidance on how to use D20 Tests and other tools to determine the results of characters' actions. Roleplaying. When the players interact with other creatures, roleplay those creatures based on whether they are Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile. Improvise based on what you know about the creatures, their knowledge, and their motivations. Then bring these creatures to life as you describe what happens. (See the "Running Social Interac- tion" section in chapter 2 for more advice.) # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS 9 - en ee \_ i One Action at a Time. The rules about actions in the Player's Handbook limit how many things a character can do at once. Keeping those rules in mind can help you adjudicate situations. Combat. In combat, many situations involve attack rolls or saving throws. The rules of combat can help you determine the effectiveness of a charac- ter's actions. The "Running Combat" section in chapter 2 offers advice on combat. Spellcasting. If a character casts a spell, you can usually let the player tell you what the spell does and how to resolve it. If questions arise, read the text of the spell yourself---how a spell is supposed to work is usually pretty clear. The general rules of spellcasting in the Player's Handbook are also essential for resolving a spell's effects. Exceptions Supersede General Rules. General rules govern each part of the game, but the game also includes class features, spells, magic items, monster abilities, and other elements that can contradict a general rule. When an exception and a general rule disagree, the exception wins. For example, it's a general rule that melee weapon attacks use the attacking character's Strength modifier. But if a feature says that a character can make melee weapon attacks using Charisma, that exception supersedes the general rule. When narrating results, try to give a flavorful description while clearly communicating what's happening in the language of the game. See the "Narration in Combat" section in chapter 2 for more advice and examples. Describing results often leads to another decision point, which returns the flow of the game to step 1. # Passing Time The game has a rhythm and flow that includes peri- ods of action and excitement interspersed with lulls. Think of how movies show time passing between scenes. When an encounter ends, you can move on to the next one. You can often gloss over hours of travel with a quick narrative summary (see the "Travel" section in chapter 2 for more advice). Sim- ilarly, if a rest period passes uneventfully, tell the aah ------\~ a # Taking Breaks When you finish a lengthy combat encounter or a tension-filled scene, or if you need time to think, take a quick break. Give your brain a few moments to refocus, relax, or prepare for the next encounter. It's OK to leave the players in suspense during a break while you figure out the consequences of their actions. Io CHAPTER \| THE BASICS = CE ee ae ee ee players that and move on. Don't make the players spend time discussing which character cooks what for dinner unless they enjoy such descriptions. It's OK to gloss over mundane details and return to the action as quickly as possible. Expect players to discuss the events of the game, spend time planning, and engage in long conver- sations in character. You don't need to be involved in those discussions unless they have questions for you. Learn to recognize the times when you can take a break as the DM, and then resume the action as soon as everyone's ready. # Ending A Session Try not to end a game session in the middle of an encounter. It's difficult to keep track of information such as Initiative order and other round-by-round details between sessions. An exception to this guideline is when you purposely end a session with a cliffhanger, where the story pauses just as some- thing monumental happens or some surprising turn of events occurs. A cliffhanger can keep players intrigued and excited until the next session. If a player missed a session and you had that play- er's character leave the party for a while, make sure that there's a way to bring the character back when the player returns. Sometimes a cliffhanger can serve this purpose: the character charges in to help their beleaguered companions. Allow a few minutes at the end of play for every- one to discuss the events of the session. Ask your players what parts of the session they liked and what they would have liked to see more. Take notes on what happened and the situation at the end of the session so you can refer back to those notes as you prepare the next session. # Example Of Play These pages present a short example of play, similar to the ones in the Player's Handbook, to illustrate how everything outlined in the "How to Run a Ses- sion" section works in practice. In this example, the Dungeon Master is running an adventure ("The Fouled Stream") from chapter 4. The four players are Amy (playing Auro, a Halfling Rogue), Maeve (playing Mirabella, an Elf Wizard), Phillip (play- ing Gareth, a Human Cleric), and Russell (playing Shreeve, a Goliath Fighter). The DM starts by asking the players to recap the action of the previous session, most of which con- sisted of creating characters. a er Jared (as DM): Last session, we met our four heroes in the little farming village of High Ery. Who re- members what happened? Amy: We were at a village council meeting about the weird stuff in the river making the fish inedible. We volunteered to investigate. Russell: So we set out and followed the river up- stream. At the first fork, we met a treant named Borogrove who pointed us to a cave that was the source of the polluted stream. Amy: Before he wandered off, he gave us a magic acorn, and that's where we ended last week. Jared: So now you're in this gloomy forest. Dry leaves rustle under your feet. You're still beside the stream, which looks murky and unwholesome beneath the shadowy trees. What do you want to do now? Russell (as Shreeve): We continue upstream? (The others nod.) jared: OK, you make your way upstream for about another hour. The farther you go, the murkier and stinkier the water becomes. Rounding a bend, you can see a cave in the hillside ahead of you. The stream tumbles from the cave mouth. There are withered shrubs clumped around the cave, appar- ently poisoned by this nasty water. Phillip (as Gareth): Into the cave! @ Jared: Who's leading the way? Russell: I'll go first. jared: The cave entrance is ten feet wide, with the stream running right down the middle. Do you want to go single file or two abreast? 2 Phillip: \| don't love the idea of stepping across the stream. Let's go single file, staying on this side of the water. (Everyone else agrees.) jared: OK, who's second? Phillip: Gareth will go second. Maeve (as Mirabella): I'll be third in line. Amy (as Auro): I'll make sure nothing's following us. jared: OK, Shreeve, as you reach the cave mouth, you hear the shrubs rustling. Russell: Oh, \| should've checked to make sure noth- ing was hiding in the shrubs! jared: In fact, the shrubs themselves are moving. They're not rooted at all---each one has two little legs and sharp claws! Everyone, roll Initiative. Russell: How many shrubs are attacking? © Jared: Six. Auro, what's your Initiative? Amy: \| got a 14. Russell: Shreeve goes on 5. Maeve: A natural 20 gives me a 21! Phillip: 19 for Gareth. jared: Mirabella, you're first. What do you do? # Sinister Shapes # Lurk Near The Cave Entrance As The Adventurers APPROACH The DM knows something the players don't: the withered shrubs are actually monsters. It's important to establish which characters are closest to the hidden monsters. By asking the players to choose their char- acters' marching order, the DM cleverly pivots away from the withered shrubs. The players don't realize their characters are in danger, and the DM is waiting for the right time to reveal the hidden monsters. The DM rolls Initiative just once for all six monsters and writes down that they'll go on Initiative count 17. The DM then goes around the table to get each player's Initiative roll. See the "Running Combat" section in chapter 2 for advice about roll- ing and tracking Initiative. # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS Ii #. 7 12 The DM doesn't have the exact posi- tions of the monsters mapped out on a grid, but it's fair to assume that they're clumped close together as they move to attack the characters. It's always fair for the DM to expect players to explain what their spells and abilities do. The DM has enough to keep track of! Asking for the spell's damage allows the DM to roll a saving throw for each mon- ster and mark off the right amount of damage for that one. In this case, though, the monsters have Vulnerability to Fire damage (because they're just dry shrubs) and so few Hit Points that they'll die no matter what they roll. It's not Shreeve's turn, but the DM de- cides to allow the Goliath Fighter to step in the way of the monster's attack because it gives Shreeve a fun heroic moment. The DM changes the monster's target to Shreeve and makes an attack roll. ---\_ oe THE RULE OF FuN D&D is a game, and everyone should have fun playing it. Everyone shares equal responsibility in moving the game along, and everyone contributes to the fun when they treat each other with respect and consideration: talking through disagreements among players or their characters, and remembering that arguments or mean- spirited squabbles can get in the way of the fun. People have many different ideas about what makes D&D fun. The "right way" to play D&D is the way you and your players agree to and enjoy. If everyone comes to the table prepared to con- tribute to the game, the entire table is likely to have a wonderful and memorable time. \~\_ --- \_ # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS --- a? 7) Maeve: How many of these walking bundles of kind- ling can \| get in a 15-foot Cone? Jared: There are three on your side of the stream and three on the other side. You can get either group in your Cone. Maeve: Mirabella puts her thumbs together and wiggles her fingertips. (Maeve mimics this action.) Fire shoots out from her fingers, catching the ones on our side of the stream. Burning Hands! Jared: OK, what do \| need to do? Maeve: The shrub things need to make Dexterity saving throws. The DC is 14. Jared: And how much damage do they take? Maeve: (Maeve rolls 3d6 for the spell's damage.) 13 Fire damage if they fail the save, 6 if they succeed. Jared: Magical fire tears through them and leaves smears of ash behind! Anything else, Mirabella? Maeve: My work here is done. (She mimes blowing smoke away from her fingertips.) jared: Gareth, you're up next. Phillip: Gareth holds his Holy Symbol and utters an imprecation while pointing at the closest shrub and casting Toll the Dead. The sound of a bell tolls, and the shrub makes a Wisdom save, DC 14. Jared: Well, \| rolled a 1. Phillip: It takes 7 Necrotic damage! Jared: Whatever moisture was in this "bundle of kindling" seems to dry up, and the thing keels over dead. Anything else, Gareth? Phillip: He glares menacingly at the other shrubs. Jared: OK, their turn. One skitters toward Mirabella! Russell: Can \| interject myself between it and Mira- bella? Jared: Sure, I'll allow it. You step into the monster's path and... (The DM makes an attack roll for the monster but rolls a 7, which isn't going to hit.) `\t t`{=tex}ears at your cloak but fails to wound you. The oth- er one has lost any interest in fighting, and it starts running away. Now it's Auro's turn. Amy: Auro looks at the one that just attacked Shreeve and pulls out his dagger. \| get a 23 to hit! Jared: That hits! What's your damage? Amy: Since Shreeve is next to it, \| can use my Sneak Attack! The shrub takes 12 Piercing damage. Jared: It's felled! Mirabella, the last one is running away. Will you let it escape? Maeve: \| think Borogrove would be disappointed in us if we let it escape into the woods. I'll cast Fire Bolt, getting a 14 to hit. Jared: You nailed it. Maeve: It takes 10 Fire damage! Jared: Yeah, the last shrub is incinerated. Well done! Every DM Is UNIQUE The preceding example of play shows how one Dun- geon Master might run an encounter, but no two DMs run the game in exactly the same way---and that's how it should be! You'll be most successful as a DM if you choose a play style that works best for you and your players.