# CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX # Npc Tracker NPC NAME: STAT BLOCK: MM PAGE: STAT BLOCK ALTERATIONS Jj ALIGNMENT A PERSONALITY y APPEARANCE \_ SECRET & ---wwe 88 NPC Secrets 1d10 Secret 1 The NPC is in disguise, concealing their identity or some aspect of their appearance. 2 The NPC is currently planning, executing, or covering up a crime. 3 The NPC (or their family) has been threat- ened with harm unless the NPC does something. 4 The NPC is under a magical compulsion (perhaps a Geas spell or some kind of curse) to behave in a certain way. 5 The NPC is seriously ill or in terrible pain. 6 The NPC feels responsible for someone's death or ill fortune. 7 'The NPC is on the brink of financial ruin. 8 The NPC is desperately lonely or harboring an unrequited passion. 9 The NPC nurses a powerful ambition. 10 The NPC is deeply dissatisfied or unhappy. RECURRING NPCs NPCs who keep showing up over the course of a campaign build the sense that the world of the game is a living, breathing place. Whether these NPCs are allies, patrons, friends, or villains, they can deepen players' investment in the world. You can use different stat blocks in the Monster Manual, perhaps with some tweaks, to reflect the same NPC at different times as they grow over the course of a campaign. For example, characters on their very first adventure might face a villain who uses the stat block of a Mage Apprentice, only to have that villain escape and return many adventures later to haunt them as a Mage. Still later, the same villain might reappear as an Archmage. Of course, the trick here is making sure that the vil- lain survives from one adventure to the next, or at least coming up with a plausible way for the villain to return from death. After all, death is rarely the final word for adventurers, so it needn't be for their opponents. \<a oe Don't Go Oversoarp Developing nonplayer characters can be fun. That said, use your time wisely. Beware of writing three pages of backstory for an NPC whose interactions with the adventurers will be over in three min- utes. The advice in this section is meant to help you create an interesting character quickly while providing just enough detail. = i # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX NPCs As PARTY MEMBERS NPCs might join the adventuring party because they want a share of the loot and are willing to accept an equal share of the risk, or they might fol- low the adventurers because of a bond of loyalty, gratitude, or love. You can delegate decisions about an NPC's actions to one of the players, especially in combat, but you can override the player's decisions to reflect the NPC's motivations. When you choose a stat block from the Monster Manual for an NPC party member, make sure the NPC doesn't overshadow the player characters. Use a stat block whose Challenge Rating is no higher than half the characters' level. These NPCs don't amass Experience Points and don't become more powerful. Here are some NPC archetypes that work well as supporting characters in an adventuring party: Comic Relief. A comic relief NPC helps lighten the mood of an adventure or game session, perhaps with an occasional display of ineptness or a gift for puns. Curmudgeon. A curmudgeon NPC is quick to com- plain humorously about the characters' terrible choices and bad planning, You can occasionally use this NPC to suggest legitimate courses of ac- tion or share insights. Dutiful Assistant. A dutiful assistant NPC is good at carrying equipment and looking after the par- ty's horses and other belongings. Such an NPC might be entirely devoted to their duty, or they might be using this easily overlooked position to pursue goals of their own. Milquetoast Healer. Absent a healer of their own, the characters might love an NPC healer whose personality matters less than the healer's devotion to the party and ability to cast Cure Wounds or Re- vivify when needed. Walking Textbook. A walking textbook NPC is knowledgeable about a particular field of exper- tise and can be a useful source of information, but they can't be relied on to make wise decisions or hold up their end in battle. Wallflower Warrior. A wallflower warrior NPC is good at fading into the background, doesn't usually chat or engage unless approached, and eagerly avoids the spotlight. Their primary purpose is to give monsters another target to attack. Even useful NPCs can slow down the game or over- stay their welcome. Consider having NPC party members stick around for no more than a few game sessions or a single adventure before making their exit. NPCs can benefit from time away from the characters now and then. As ame MBER OF ANOTHER GROUP OF HEROES, NikO FIRST JOINED SWEILA, DiANa Eric, ANO Presto as AN NPC Heater LOYALTY Loyalty is an optional rule you can use to determine how far an NPC party member will go to protect or assist the characters (even those the NPC doesn't particularly like). An NPC party member who is abused or ignored is likely to abandon or betray the party, whereas an NPC who owes a life debt to the characters or shares their goals might fight to the death for them. You can simply decide on an NPC's loyalty, or you can track a Loyalty Score using the following rules. Loyalty Score. An NPC's loyalty is measured on a numerical scale from 0 to 20. The NPC's maximum Loyalty Score is equal to the highest Charisma score among all adventurers in the party, and its starting Loyalty Score is half that number. If the highest Charisma score changes---perhaps a char- acter dies or leaves the group---adjust the NPC's Loyalty Score accordingly. Tracking Loyalty. Keep track of an NPC's Loyalty Score in secret so that the players won't know for sure whether an NPC party member is loyal or disloyal. An NPC's Loyalty Score increases by 1d4 if other party members help the NPC achieve a personal goal. Likewise, an NPC's Loyalty Score increases by 1d4 if the NPC is treated particularly well (for example, given a magic weapon as a gift) or rescued by another party member. An NPC's Loyalty Score can never be raised above its maximum. When other party members act in a manner that runs counter to the NPC's alignment or personality, reduce the NPC's Loyalty Score by Id4. Reduce the NPC's Loyalty Score by 2d4 if the NPC is abused, misled, or endangered by other party members for purely selfish reasons. A Loyalty Score can never drop below 0. Meaning of Loyalty. An NPC with a Loyalty Score of 10 or higher risks anything to help fellow party members. An NPC whose Loyalty Score is between 1 and 10 is tenuously faithful to the party. An NPC whose Loyalty Score drops to 0 no longer acts in the party's best interests. The disloyal NPC either leaves the party (attacking characters who attempt to intervene) or works in secret to bring about the party's downfall. Crew Loyalty and Mutiny. If the characters own or operate a sailing ship or similar vessel, you can use these rules to track the loyalty of individual crew members or the ship's crew as a whole. If at least half the crew's Loyalty Scores drop to 0 during a voyage, the crew turns Hostile and stages a mutiny. If the ship is berthed, disloyal crew members leave the ship and never return. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 89 go # Zarak Applies Poison To His Dagger POISON Given their insidious and deadly nature, poisons are a favorite tool among assassins and evil creatures. Poisons come in the following four types: Contact. Contact poison can be smeared on an object and remains potent until it is touched or washed off. A creature that touches contact poison with exposed skin suffers its effects. Ingested. A creature must swallow an entire dose of ingested poison to suffer its effects. The dose can be delivered in food or a liquid. You may de- cide that a partial dose has a reduced effect, such as allowing Advantage on the saving throw or dealing only half as much damage on a failed save. Inhaled. Poisonous powders and gases take effect when inhaled. Blowing the powder or releasing the gas subjects creatures in a 5-foot Cube to its effect. The resulting cloud dissipates immediately afterward. Holding one's breath is ineffective against inhaled poisons, as they affect nasal mem- branes, tear ducts, and other parts of the body. Injury. Injury poison can be applied as a Bonus Action to a weapon, a piece of ammunition, or similar object. The poison remains potent until delivered through a wound or washed off. A crea- ture that takes Piercing or Slashing damage from an object coated with the poison is exposed to its effects. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX # Purchasing Poison In some settings, laws prohibit the possession and use of poison, but an illicit dealer or unscrupulous apothecary might keep a hidden stash. Characters with criminal contacts might be able to acquire poi- son easily. Other characters might have to make ex- tensive inquiries and pay bribes before they acquire the poison they seek. # Harvesting Poison A character can attempt to harvest poison from a venomous creature that is dead or has the Incapac- itated condition. The effort takes 1d6 minutes, after which the character makes a DC 20 Intelligence (Nature) check using a Poisoner's Kit. On a success- ful check, the character harvests enough poison for a single dose, and no additional poison can be harvested from that creature. On a failed check, the character is unable to extract any poison. If the character fails the check by 5 or more, the character is subjected to the creature's poison. # Sample Poisons Example poisons are detailed here in alphabetical order. Each poison's description includes the sug- gested price for a single dose of the poison, its type (contact, ingested, inhaled, or injury), and a description of the poison's debilitating effects. ASSASSIN'S BLoop (150 GP) Ingested Poison A creature subjected to Assassin's Blood makes a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 6 (1d12) Poison damage and has the Poisoned condition for 24 hours. On a success- ful save, the creature takes half as much damage only. BURNT OTHUR FuMEs (500 GP) Inhaled Poison A creature subjected to Burnt Othur Fumes must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or take 10 (3d6) Poison damage, and it must repeat the save at the start of each of its turns. On each suc- cessive failed save, the creature takes 3 (1d6) Poison damage. After three successful saves, the poison ends. CARRION CRAWLER Mucus (200 GP) Contact Poison A creature subjected to Carrion Crawler Mucus must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 1 minute. The creature also has the Paralyzed condition while Poisoned in this way. The creature repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. ESSENCE OF ETHER (300 GP) Inhaled Poison A creature subjected to Essence of Ether must suc- ceed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 8 hours. The creature also has the Unconscious condition while Poisoned in this way. The creature wakes up if it takes dam- age or if another creature takes an action to shake it awake. Lottu's St1nc (200 GP) Injury Poison A creature subjected to Lolth's Sting must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 1 hour. If the creature fails the save by 5 or more, the creature also has the Unconscious condition while Poisoned in this way. The creature wakes up if it takes damage or if another creature takes an action to shake it awake. MALICE (250 GP) Inhaled Poison A creature subjected to Malice must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Poi- soned condition for 1 hour. The creature also has the Blinded condition while Poisoned in this way. MIDNIGHT TEARs (1,500 GP) Ingested Poison A creature that ingests Midnight Tears suffers no effect until the stroke of midnight. Any effect that ends the Poisoned condition neutralizes this poi- son. If the poison hasn't been neutralized before midnight, the creature makes a DC 17 Constitution saving throw, taking 31 (9d6) Poison damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. O1t oF Taccirt (400 GP) Contact Poison A creature subjected to Oil of Taggit must succeed on a DC 13 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 24 hours. The creature also has the Unconscious condition while Poisoned in this way. It wakes up if it takes damage. PALE TINCTURE (250 GP) Ingested Poison A creature subjected to Pale Tincture must succeed ona DC 16 Constitution saving throw or take 3 (1d6) Poison damage and have the Poisoned condi- tion. The Poisoned creature repeats the save every 24 hours, taking 3 (1d6) Poison damage on a failed save. The damage the poison deals can't be healed by any means while the creature remains Poisoned. After seven successful saves against the poison, the creature is no longer Poisoned. PuRPLE WorM Polson (2,000 GP) Injury Poison A creature subjected to Purple Worm Poison makes a DC 21 Constitution saving throw, taking 35 (10d6) Poison damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. SERPENT VENOM (200 GP) Injury Poison A creature subjected to Serpent Venom must suc- ceed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw, taking 10 (3d6) Poison damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Torror (600 GP) Ingested Poison A creature subjected to Torpor poison must succeed on a DC 15 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 4d6 hours. The creature's Speed is halved while the creature is Poisoned in this way. TruTH Serum (150 GP) Ingested Poison A creature subjected to Truth Serum must succeed on a DC 11 Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition for 1 hour. The Poisoned crea- ture can't knowingly communicate a lie. WYVERN Porson (1,200 GP) Injury Poison A creature subjected to Wyvern Poison makes a DC 14 Constitution saving throw, taking 24 (7d6) Poi- son damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX gI 92 i RENOWN Renown is an optional rule you can use to track characters' standing, individually or as a party, within a particular group, such as a faction, an or- ganization, or a community. A character's or party's Renown Score starts at 0, then increases as characters earn favor and reputa- tion with respect to the group. You can tie benefits to a character's renown, including ranks, titles, and access to resources. Players track renown separately for each group their characters are associated with. For example, an adventurer might have a Renown Score of 5 with one faction and a Renown Score of 20 with another, based on the character's interaction with each group. You can use renown over the course of an entire campaign or within a single adventure. At a cam- paign scale, you might set up factions or guilds that characters can join, individually or as a group, and the characters pursue ranks and rewards by gaining Renown within their organizations. At an adven- ture level, you might decide that the characters as a group need to earn a Renown Score of 5+ with the council before the council trusts the characters enough to share resources with them. # Gaining Renown At your discretion, a character or party can in- crease their renown in the following ways: Completing Missions. Advancing a group's inter- ests increases a character's Renown Score within that group by 1. Completing a mission specifically assigned by that group or that directly benefits the group increases the character's Renown Score by 2. Hugely significant quests might grant Re- nown Score increases of 3 or 4 at once. Group Involvement. Once a character has estab- lished a Renown Score of 1+ with a group, the character can gain renown by spending time between adventures undertaking minor tasks for the group and socializing with its members. After doing so for a number of days equal to 10 times the character's current Renown Score, the charac- ter's Renown Score increases by 1. # Benefits Of Renown Use these guidelines when determining the benefits of increasing renown. RECOGNITION A character who has a Renown Score of 3+ with a group is a respected member of that group. Other members of the group are Friendly toward the character by default and provide the character with lodging and food in dire circumstances. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX \<--- a, RANK Some groups have hierarchies that characters can ascend as they improve their Renown Scores. Other groups have positions of honor that characters can apply for if their Renown Score is high enough. Characters can earn promotions as their Renown Scores increase. You can establish certain Renown Score thresholds as prerequisites (though not nec- essarily the only prerequisites) for advancing in rank. You can set these thresholds however you like, creating ranks and titles for the groups in your campaign. PERKS \| Earning renown within a group might come with certain benefits. A character with a Renown Score of 3+ might gain access to a reliable contact, a safe house, or a discount on adventuring gear. With a Renown Score of 10+, a character might gain access to Potions and Scrolls, the ability to call in a favor, or backup on dangerous missions. A character whose Renown Score rises to 50 might be able to call on a small army, acquire a Rare magic item, gain access to a helpful spellcaster, or assign special mis- sions to members of lower status. LosInc RENOWN Disagreements with members of a group aren't enough to cause a loss of renown within that group. However, serious offenses committed against the group or its members can result in a loss of renown and rank within the organization. The extent of the loss depends on the infraction and is left to your dis- cretion. A character's Renown Score with a group can never drop below 0. # Level-based Renown If you want to use the benefits of renown without tracking Renown Scores, you can use a character's level as a shorthand for the character's Renown Score with a group, assuming the character has worked with or for that group for most of the char- acter's career. The Level-Based Renown table shows equivalencies between Renown Score and character level. LEVEL-BASED RENOWN Renown Score \_--- Character Level 1 1 3 3 10 5 25 Nn 50 V7 MA CITY IS"FULL OF MMESTICAL SURPRISES" SETTLEMENTS Your campaign world is likely to include settlements that characters can visit. The characters might even adopt one of these settlements as a home base, in or near which they can build their Bastions when they are of high enough level to do so (see chapter 8). The Settlements by Size table provides population ranges for villages, towns, and cities as well as the value of the most expensive item the settlement is likely to have for sale. Adjust these numbers as you wish to account for special circumstances. For ex- ample, a Potion of Healing (which costs 50 GP) is too expensive an item to purchase in most villages, but a village that happens to have an alchemist, an herbalist, or a potion brewer might have one or more such potions for sale. SETTLEMENTS BY SIZE Settlement Population Range Max. GP Value Village Up to 500 20 GP Town 501-5,000 2,000 GP City 5,001 and higher # 200,000 Gp # Settlement Tables And Tracker The following tables allow you to flesh out details about a settlement. You can use the accompanying Settlement Tracker to record important informa- tion about a village, town, or city in your campaign. DEFINING TRAITS 1d20 'Trait 1-2 Fortified outer wall 3-4 Lots of gardens, parks, and greenery 5-6 Lots of mud, filth, and litter 7-8 Sprawling cemetery 9-10 Lingering fog 11-12 Noise and smoke from smithies and forges 13 Canals and bridges 14 Cliffs on one or more sides 15-16 Clean streets and well-maintained buildings 17-18 Ancient ruins within the settlement 19-20 Impressive structure (such as a keep, tem- ple, circle of standing stones, or ziggurat) Do \| NEED A SETTLEMENT Map? A settlement doesn't always require a map. Sim- ply describing the settlement to your players is usually sufficient. But if it's important for the players to know where certain buildings or other locations are in the settlement, having a map is helpful. For an example of a settlement map, see the Crossroads Village map in appendix B. "= 1 al # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 93 # Claims To Fame 1d20 Claim to Fame 1 won num & Ww NY ond o 1d20 Claim to Fame Delicious food 11 'Piety Rude people 12 Gambling Friendly folk 13 Godlessness Artists or writers 14 Education Great hero/savior 15 Wines Flowers 16 High fashion Seasonal festival 17 \_ Political intrigue Hauntings 18 Powerful guilds Spellcasters 19 Patriotism Decadence 20 Ancient ruins CURRENT CALAMITIES 1d12 Calamity \] wu & WwW Nh Monsters infest the settlement. A key figure died; murder is suspected. War brews between rival guilds or gangs. A plague or famine sparks riots. Monsters attack anyone who approaches or leaves the settlement. Trade disputes cause economic hardship. A natural disaster threatens the settlement. A prophecy of doom has residents on edge. Locals are being drafted to fight in a war. Political or religious strife threatens violence. The settlement is under siege. Scandal threatens powerful local families. Loca. LEADERS 1d12 Leader 1 Respected, fair, and just leader or council 2 'Feared tyrant 3. Coward manipulated by others 4 Illegitimate leader causing civil unrest 5 Powerful monster 6 Mysterious, anonymous conspirators 7 Contested leadership (with open fighting) 8 Acrimonious council unable to make decisions 9 Doltish lout 10 Dying leader (with disputed succession) 11\_\_ Iron-willed and respected leader or council 12 Religious leader or council CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX TAVERN NAMES\* 1420' First Part 1 wo on Dw & WwW NH a oe ee ee eo ed won nun k WNrhH ---\| OO 20 The Golden The Silver The Beardless The Laughing The Dancing The Gilded The Stumbling The Wolf and The Fallen The Leering The Drunken The Wine and The Roaring The Frowning The Barrel and The Thirsty The Wandering The Barking The Happy The Witch and Second Part Lyre Dolphin Dwarf Pegasus Hut Rose Stag Duck Lamb Demon Goat Spirit Horde Jester Bucket Crow Satyr Dog Spider Dragon \*Roll a separate d20 for each part of the tavern's name. # Random Shops 1d20 Type 1 Pawnshop 2 Apothecary 3. Grocer 4 Delicatessen 5 Potter 6 Undertaker 7 Bookstore 8 Moneylender 9 Armorer 10 = Chandler 1d20 Type 11 Smithy 12 Carpenter 13. Weaver 14 'Jeweler 15 Baker 16 Mapmaker 17 Tailor 18 Ropemaker 19 Mason 20 = Scribe (SETTLEMENT TRACKER SETTLEMENT NAME: O VILLAGE (Pop. uP TO 500) © TOWN (Pop. 501-5,000) O CITY (Por. 5,001+) DEFINING TRAIT Al lk CLAIM TO FAME A CURRENT CALAMITY Ik LOCAL LEADER Al NOTEWORTHY PEOPLE NOTEWORTHY PLACES GP VALUE OF THE MOST EXPENSIVE ITEM FOR SALE: # Siege Equipment Siege equipment includes objects designed to assail castles and other walled fortifications. Most siege weapons require creatures to move them, as well as to load, aim, and fire them. BALLISTA Large Object Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 50 Ballista Bolt (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged Attack Roll: +6, range 120/480 ft. Hit: 16 (3d10) Piercing damage. A Ballista is a massive crossbow that fires heavy bolts. Loading a Ballista requires the Utilize action, and aiming it requires another Utilize action. Then a crew member can take the Ballista Bolt action. CANNON Large Object Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 75 Cannonball (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged Attack Roll: +6, range 600/2,400 ft. Hit: 44 (8d10) Blud- geoning damage. A Cannon uses gunpowder or Arcane power to pro- pel heavy iron balls at destructive speeds. A Cannon is usually attached to a wooden frame with wheels. Loading a Cannon requires the Utilize action, and aiming it requires another Utilize action. Then a crew member can take the Cannonball action. FLAMETHROWER COACH Large Object Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 100 Flamethrower. Dexterity Saving Throw: DC 15, each creature in a 60-foot-long, 5-foot-wide Line. Failure: 14 (4d6) Fire damage, and the creature starts burn- ing. Success: Half damage only. Powered by magic, this iron coach has a flame- thrower turret mounted atop it. The coach can accommodate up to two Medium creatures. An iron hatch in the vehicle's underbelly grants access. Narrow slits in the front, sides, and back of the coach allow its occupants to see outside. A creature in the coach has Three-Quarters Cover against attacks and other effects that originate out- side it. The coach is designed for a crew of two: a driver and a gunner. The driver can take the Utilize action to move and turn the coach, which has a Speed of 30 feet, using levers and pedals inside. The gunner can use the Flamethrower action to aim and fire it. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX Keo Launcner KEG LAUNCHER Large Object Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 30 Toxic Keg (Requires Load and Aim). Constitution Sav- ing Throw: DC 15, each creature in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point 30 to 300 feet from the launcher. Failure: 14 (4d6) Poison damage. Success: Half damage. A back-mounted, wooden catapult flings small kegs of toxic gas. Loading a Keg Launcher requires the Utilize action, and aiming it requires another Utilize action. Then a crew member can take the Toxic Keg action. LIGHTNING CANNON Medium Object Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 30 Lightning Ball (Requires Aim). Ranged Attack Roll: +6, range 300/1,200 ft. Hit: 22 (4d10) Lightning dam- age. A Lightning Cannon is a small, bronze cannon in- laid with Arcane runes and mounted on a heavy tri- pod device. It launches balls of crackling electricity. Aiming a Lightning Cannon requires the Utilize action, then a crew member can take the Lightning Ball action. MANGONEL Large Object Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 100 Mangonel Stone (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged Attack Roll: +5, range 200/800 ft. (can't hit targets within 60 feet of itself). Hit: 27 (5d10) Bludgeoning damage. A Mangonel is a catapult that hurls heavy projec- tiles in a high are, so it can hit targets behind walls. Loading a Mangonel requires two Utilize actions, and aiming it requires two more Utilize actions. Then a crew member can take the Mangonel Stone action. RAM Large Object Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 100 Ram (Requires Position). Melee Attack Roll: +8, reach 5 ft. Hit: 16 (3d10) Bludgeoning damage. A Ram consists of a movable gallery equipped with a heavy log suspended from two roof beams by chains. The log is shod in iron and used to batter through doors and barricades. Positioning a Ram requires three Utilize actions. Then a crew member can use the Ram action. The gallery roof gives the operators Total Cover against attacks and other effects from above. SIEGE TOWER Gargantuan Object Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 200 A Siege Tower is a mobile wooden structure with a beam frame and slats in its walls. Large wooden wheels or rollers allow the tower to be pushed or pulled by soldiers or beasts of burden. Medium or smaller creatures can use the Siege Tower to reach the top of walls up to 40 feet high. A creature in the tower has Total Cover against attacks and other ef- fects that originate outside it. # Suspended Cauldron Large Object Armor Class: 19 Hit Points: 20 Spill (Requires a Full Cauldron). Dexterity Saving Throw: DC 15, each creature in a 10-foot square directly below the cauldron. Failure: 10 (3d6) Fire damage. Success: Half damage. MANGONEL An iron pot is suspended so that it can be tipped easily, spilling its contents. Once emptied, a caul- dron must be refilled before it can be used again. Filling the cauldron requires three Utilize actions. Then a crew member can take the Spill action. Cauldrons are typically filled with boiling oil but can be filled with other substances, such as acid or green slime (see "Hazards" in this chapter), with dif- ferent effects. TREBUCHET Huge Object Armor Class: 15 Hit Points: 150 Trebuchet Stone (Requires Load and Aim). Ranged Attack Roll: +5, range 300/1,200 ft. (can't hit targets within 60 feet of itself). Hit: 44 (8d10) Bludgeoning damage. A Trebuchet is a catapult that throws its payload in a high arc so it can hit targets behind walls. Load- ing a Trebuchet requires two Utilize actions, and aiming it requires two more Utilize actions. Then a crew member can take the Trebuchet Stone action. re # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 97 =\~ # Supernatural Gifts A supernatural gift is a special reward granted bya being or force of great magical power. Supernatural gifts come in two forms: Blessing. A Blessing is usually bestowed by a god or a godlike being. Charm. A Charm is usually the work of a powerful spirit, a magical location, or a mythic creature. Unlike a magic item, a supernatural gift isn't an object and doesn't require Attunement. BLESSINGS A character might receive a Blessing from a deity for doing something truly momentous---an accom- plishment that catches the attention of both gods and mortals. A Blessing is an appropriate reward for one of the following accomplishments: - Restoring a god's most sacred shrine - Foiling an apocalyptic plot by a god's enemies - Helping a god's favored servant complete a quest An adventurer might also receive a Blessing in ad- vance of a perilous quest. For example, a Paladin could receive one before setting out on a quest to slay a terrifying lich that is responsible for a magi- cal plague sweeping the land. A character should receive a Blessing only if it is useful to that character, and some Blessings come with expectations on the part of the benefactor. A # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX # A Magical Creature Like A Unicorn # Might Bestow A Supernatural Gift god might give a Blessing for a particular purpose, such as recovering a holy person's remains or top- pling a tyrannical empire, and could revoke the Blessing if a character fails to pursue that purpose or acts counter to it. A character retains the benefit of a Blessing forever or until it is taken away by the being who granted it. There is no limit on the number of Blessings a character can receive, but it should be rare for a character to have more than one at a time. More- over, a character can't benefit from multiple in- stances of a Blessing at the same time. For example, a character can't benefit from two instances of the Blessing of Health at once. You can easily create more Blessings by mimick- ing the properties of a Wondrous Item. BLESSING OF HEALTH Supernatural Gift (Blessing) Your Constitution score increases by 2, up toa maximum of 22. BLESSING OF MAGIC RESISTANCE Supernatural Gift (Blessing) You have Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. BLESSING OF PROTECTION Supernatural Gift (Blessing) You gain a +1 bonus to AC and saving throws. BLESSING OF UNDERSTANDING Supernatural Gift (Blessing) Your Wisdom score increases by 2, up to a maxi- mum of 22. BLESSING OF VALHALLA Supernatural Gift (Blessing) This Blessing grants you the power to summon spirit warriors, as if you are blowing a silver Horn of Valhalla. Once you use this Blessing, you can't use it again until 7 days have passed. # --- --- - ------- BLESSING OF WEAPON ENHANCEMENT Supernatural Gift (Blessing) One nonmagical weapon in your possession be- comes a +! Weapon while you wield it. BLESSING OF WOUND CLOSURE Supernatural Gift (Blessing) This Blessing grants you the benefits of a Periapt of Wound Closure. CHARMS Charms can be received in many different ways. For example, a Wizard who finds an eldritch secret in a dead archmage's spellbook might be infused with the magic of a Charm, as might a character who solves a sphinx's riddle or drinks from a magical fountain. Mythic creatures sometimes grace their allies with Charms, and some explorers find them- selves bearing a Charm after discovering a long-lost location drenched in primeval magic. Some Charms can be used only once; others can be used a specific number of times before vanishing. if a Charm lets a character cast a spell, the char- acter can do so without expending a spell slot or providing any spell components. Unless otherwise stated, the spell uses its normal casting time, range, and duration; if the spell requires Concentration, the character must concentrate. A Charm can't be removed from a creature by anything short of divine intervention or a Wish spell. A character can't benefit from multiple in- stances of a Charm at the same time. A typical Charm mimics the effects of a Potion or spell, so it is easy to create more Charms of your own. CHARM OF ANIMAL CONJURING Supernatural Gift (Charm) This Charm allows you to cast Conjure Animals. Once used three times, the Charm vanishes from you. CHARM OF DARKVISION Supernatural Gift (Charm) This Charm allows you to cast Darkvision. Once used three times, the Charm vanishes from you. CHARM OF FEATHER FALLING Supernatural Gift (Charm) This Charm grants you the benefits of a Ring of Feather Falling. These benefits last for 10 days, after which the Charm vanishes from you. CHARM OF HEROISM Supernatural Gift (Charm) This Charm allows you to give yourself the benefit of a Potion of Heroism as a Magic action. Once you do so, the Charm vanishes from you. CHARM OF RESTORATION Supernatural Gift (Charm) This Charm has 3 charges. You can expend some of its charges to cast one of the following spells: Greater Restoration (2 charges) or Lesser Restoration (1 charge). Once all its charges have been expended, the Charm vanishes from you. CHARM OF THE SLAYER Supernatural Gift (Charm) One weapon in your possession becomes a Dragon Slayer or Giant Slayer (DM's choice) for the next 9 days. The Charm then vanishes from you, and the weapon returns to normal. CHARM OF VITALITY Supernatural Gift (Charm) This Charm allows you to give yourself the benefit of a Potion of Vitality as a Magic action. Once you do so, the Charm vanishes from you. # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX 99 100 TRAPS Traps should be used sparingly, lest they lose their charm. A hidden pit can be a fun surprise, but too many traps in an adventure can lead players to be- come overly cautious, which slows down the game. The best traps are fleeting distractions that skilled characters can overcome in a short amount of time or deadly puzzles that require quick thinking and teamwork to overcome. Traps that are undetectable and inescapable are rarely fun. # Parts Of A Trap The description of a trap includes the following parts after the trap's name: Severity and Levels. A trap is designated as a nuisance or as deadly for characters of certain levels. A nuisance trap is unlikely to seriously harm characters of the indicated levels, whereas a deadly trap can grievously damage characters of the indicated levels. Trigger. Traps are often set to go off when a crea- ture enters an area or touches an object. Examples of triggers include stepping on a pressure plate, crossing a trip wire, turning a doorknob, or using the wrong key in a lock. Duration. Some traps have durations expressed in rounds, minutes, or hours. Others specify that their effects last until the trap is destroyed or dispelled. If a trap's duration is instantaneous, its effect is resolved instantly. If a trap resets after activating, that fact is noted in this entry. A trap is otherwise inert after activation. Use caution when introducing a trap to characters of a level lower than the trap's level range. A trap that is a nuisance at one level range could be deadly to characters of a lower level range. EXAMPLE TRAPS Traps are presented in alphabetical order. COLLAPSING ROOF Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature crosses a trip wire Duration: Instantaneous This trap uses a trip wire to collapse an unstable section of ceiling. The trip wire is 3 inches off the ground and stretches between two weak supports that topple when the trip wire is pulled. The first creature that crosses the trip wire causes the supports to topple and the unstable section of ceiling to collapse. Each creature beneath the unsta- ble section of ceiling must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw, taking 11 (2d10) Bludgeoning # CHAPTER \| DM'S TOOLBOX ae eee CF damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Rubble from the collapse turns the trapped area into Difficult Terrain. Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature can examine the trapped area and make a DC II Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the trip wire and the unstable section of ceiling on a successful check. Once detected, the trip wire can be easily cut or avoided (no ability check required). At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing the damage and the save DC, as shown in the following table. Levels Bludgeoning Damage Save DC 5-10 22 (4d10) 15 11-16 55 (10d10) 7 17-20 99 (18d10) 19 FALLING NET Nuisance Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature crosses a trip wire Duration: Instantaneous A falling net trap uses a trip wire to release a weighted, 10-foot-square Net suspended from the ceiling. The trip wire is 3 inches off the ground and stretches between two columns or trees. The first creature that crosses the trip wire causes the Net to fall on it. The target must succeed ona DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or have the Restrained condition until it escapes. The target succeeds automatically if it's Huge or larger. A crea- ture can take an action to make a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check, freeing itself or another creature within its reach from the Net on a successful check. Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature can examine the trapped area and make a DC Il Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the trip wire and the suspended Net on a successful check. Once detected, the trip wire can be easily cut or avoided (no ability check required). Destroy the Net. Reducing the Net to 0 Hit Points frees any creature trapped in it (see the Player's Handbook for the Net's statistics). Set the Trap. A creature that has Thieves' Tools and all the trap's components (including a Net) can try to set a falling net trap, doing so with a success- ful DC 13 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. Each attempt to set this trap takes 10 minutes. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing the weight of the Net, which increases the save DC and the DC of the Strength (Athletics) check as follows: DC 12 at levels 5-10, DC 14 at levels 11-16, or DC 16 at levels 17-20. oa --- FIRE-CASTING STATUE Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature moves onto a pressure plate Duration: Instantaneous, and the trap resets at the start of the next turn When a creature moves onto this trap's pressure plate for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there, a nearby statue exhales a 15-foot Cone of magical flame. The statue can look like anything, such as a dragon or a Wizard. Each creature in the Cone must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw, taking 11 (2d10) Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Detect and Disarm. A Detect Magic spell reveals an aura of Evocation magic around the statue. As a Search action, a creature within 5 feet of the statue can examine it and make a DC 10 Wisdom (Percep- tion) check, detecting a tiny glyph on the statue on a successful check. Once the glyph is found, a character can take a Study action to examine it and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Arcana) check, ascer- taining that the glyph means "fire" on a successful check. As an action, a character can use a sharp tool to deface the glyph, which disarms the trap. As a Search action, a creature can examine the section of floor that forms the pressure plate and make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the pressure plate on a successful check. Wedging an Iron Spike or similar object under the pressure plate prevents the trap from triggering. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing the damage and the area of ef- fect, as shown in the following table. Levels FireDamage \_--- Area of Effect 5-10 22 (4d10) ---30-foot Cone 11-16 55 (10d10) 60-foot Cone 17-20 99 (18d10) 120-foot Cone HIDDEN PIT Nuisance Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature moves onto the pit's lid Duration: Instantaneous This 10-foot-deep pit has a hinged lid constructed from material identical to the surrounding floor. When a creature moves onto the lid, it swings open like a trapdoor, causing the creature to fall into the pit. The lid remains open thereafter. A creature that falls into the pit takes 3 (1d6) Bludgeoning damage from the fall. Detect and Disarm. As a Study action, a creature can examine the section of floor that forms the pit's lid and make a DC 15 Intelligence (Investigation) check, detecting the pit on a successful check. Once the pit is detected, an Iron Spike or a similar object can be wedged between the pit's lid and the surrounding floor to prevent the lid from opening, thereby making it safe to cross. The cover can also be held shut using Arcane Lock or similar magic. Escape. A creature needs a Climb Speed, climbing gear, or magic such as Spider Climb to scale the pit's smooth walls. You can make the pit easier to escape by adding cracks in the walls big enough to serve as handholds and footholds. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing the pit's depth and damage, as shown in the following table. Levels Pit Depth Bludgeoning Damage 5-10 30 feet 10 (3d6) 1-16 60 feet 21 (6d6) 17-20 120 feet 42 (12d6) POISONED DARTS Deadly Trap (Levels 1-4) Trigger: A creature moves onto a pressure plate Duration: Instantaneous, and the trap resets at the start of the next turn if it has activated fewer than three times When a creature moves onto this trap's pressure plate for the first time on a turn, poisoned darts shoot from tubes embedded in the surrounding walls. The holes that house these tubes are ob- scured by dust and cobwebs or skillfully hidden amid bas-reliefs, murals, or frescoes. Each creature in the darts' path must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or be struck by 1d3 darts, taking 3 (1d6) Poison damage per dart. Detect and Disarm. As a Search action, a creature can examine the walls and make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the holes on a success- ful check. Plugging all the holes with wax, cloth, or detritus prevents the darts from firing. Asa Search action, a creature can examine the section of floor that forms the pressure plate and make a DC 15 Wisdom (Perception) check, detecting the pressure plate on a successful check. Wedging an Iron Spike or a similar object under the pressure plate prevents the trap from triggering. At Higher Levels. You can scale the trap for higher levels by increasing each dart's Poison damage as follows: 7 (2d6) at levels 5-10, 14 (4d6) at levels 11-16, or 24 (7d6) at levels 17-20.