# Play Style Here are some questions that can help you define your unique style as a DM and the kind of game you want to run: Hack and Slash or Immersive Roleplaying? Does the game focus on combat and action or on a rich story with detailed NPCs? All Ages or Mature Themes? Is the game for all ages, or does it involve mature themes? Gritty or Cinematic? Do you prefer gritty realism, or are you more focused on making the game feel cinematic and superheroic? Serious or Silly? Do you want to maintain a seri- ous tone, or is humor your goal? Preplanned or Improvised? Do you like to plan thoroughly, or do you prefer to improvise? General or Thematic? Is the game a mixture of themes and genres, or does it center on a particu- lar theme or a genre such as horror? Morally Ambiguous or Heroic? Are you comfort- able with moral ambiguity, such as allowing the characters to explore whether the end justifies the means? Or are you happier with straightforward heroic principles, such as justice, sacrifice, and helping the downtrodden? HousE RULES House rules are new or modified rules you add to your game to make it your own and to enhance the style you have in mind for your game. Before you establish a house rule, ask yourself two questions: - Will the rule or change improve the game? - Will my players like it? if you're confident that the answer to both ques- tions is yes, give the new rule a try. Present house rules as experiments, and ask your players to pro- vide feedback on them. If you introduce a house rule that isn't fun, remove or revise the rule. # Recording Rules Interpretations if a question about the interpretation of a rule comes up in your game, record how you decide to interpret it. Add that to your collection of house rules so you and the players can reference it when the rule comes up again later. ATMOSPHERE Some DMs use music to create an appropriate atmosphere for their game sessions. They might use soundtracks from adventure movies or video games, although classical, ambient, or other music styles can also work well. Some DMs adjust lighting or use sound effects. Miniatures and dioramas can contribute to the game's atmosphere and help players visualize events. Check with your players, though: some might find music, lighting, or sound effects distract- ing; might prefer not to be startled by loud noises; or might need to avoid certain lighting effects. DELEGATION If there are parts of the game you prefer not to han- dle yourself, assign them to players who enjoy them. If you don't want to break your narrative stride by looking up a rule, designate another player to be the rulebook reference expert. If you don't like tracking Initiative, ask another player to do so. # Learning By Observing One of the best ways to learn how to run a D&D game is to observe other DMs in action. Another DM can give you a solid foundation for understand- ing the role---as well as inspire you with cool things you can do in your games. You can use these questions to help you reflect on a game you observe: Beginning the Session. How did the DM start the session? Was there a recap? Body Language. What gestures did the DM use when describing a scene? How did the DM's body language change when playing different NPCs? DM Voice. Did the DM use different voices or man- nerisms for NPCs? Did the DM change the pitch or tempo of narration in different situations? Player Participation. Did the players participate in the world-building or make decisions that seemed to send the adventure in an unexpected direction? How did the DM handle it? Rules Adjudication. To what extent did the DM lean on the rules to adjudicate outcomes? Did the DM adjudicate situations wisely or in ways that made the game fun to watch? Three Pillars. How much of the session was taken up by combat, exploration, or social interaction? Tone and Mood. How would you describe the tone and mood of the game? Did it change over the course of the session? Turns of Phrase. Were there any words or bits of narration you really liked? (If so, jot them down.) World-Building. What elements of the DM's world or the adventure grabbed your attention? # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS 13 \| GAME EXPECTATIONS DM NAME: Player NAME: # Game Theme And Flavor # Potentially Sensitive Elements EXAMPLES: SPIDERS, SNAKES, DEMONS, ROMANCE, MIND CONTROL X HARD LIMIT: DON'T MENTION OR INCLUDE \> SOFT LIMIT: HANDLE WITH CARE # Or Off-camera # Player's Hopes And Expectations WHAT DO YOU WANT TO SEE IN THIS CAMPAIGN? # At-the-table Concerns EXAMPLES: SHOUTING, SWEARING, ALCOHOL, SHARING DICE # Ensuring Fun For All Ahead of the game, if you haven't done so already, discuss with your players the experience you're all hoping for, as well as topics, themes, and behavior that might spoil someone's enjoyment of the game. # Mutual Respect Whether you're playing with long-time friends or strangers, it's important to create a foundation of mutual trust. The best games happen when everyone at the table feels safe enough to be them- selves, speak up, and get into character. It's up to everyone to uphold the principles of re- spect. Difficult conversations often fall on the DM to lead, but they don't have to. If one player's behav- ior is interfering with everyone else's enjoyment, everyone has a stake in helping to resolve the issue. # Setting Expectations Before you assemble a group around a game table, pitch the adventures you're thinking about running to your prospective players. Note the in-world con- flicts that might arise, the setting's overall tone, and the themes you'd like to explore. (The "Every DM Is Unique" section earlier in this chapter can help you describe your game to others.) Telling players what to expect prepares them as they imagine what sorts of characters they could create and launches conversations about content to be embraced and avoided. You don't need to reveal the major plot points or twists in your story, but share the themes you're interested in exploring, the kinds of stories you're inspired by, and which flavors of fantasy (outlined in chapter 5) interest you. Being transparent with your players allows them to decide if this is a game they want to play, which is best to know before play begins. Being clear about your expectations and making sure you understand your players' expectations in return can help ensure a smooth game. Take your players' opinions and desires seriously, and make sure they take yours just as seriously. Ideally, you'll find a style of play that suits everyone. HARD AND Sort LIMITS Beyond the general themes and flavors of fantasy you're interested in exploring in your campaign, it's important to have a conversation with your players about topics that can be sensitive or uncomfortable. It can be helpful to discuss these topics in terms of soft and hard limits: - Asoft limit applies to a topic that should be handled carefully, as it might create unwelcome anxiety, fear, or discomfort. - Ahard limit applies to a topic that should not be mentioned or described. DMs and players can have phobias or triggers that others might not be aware of. Any in-game topic or theme that makes a member of the gaming group feel unsafe (a hard limit) must be avoided. If a topic or theme makes one or more players nervous but they consent to include it in-game (a soft limit), incorporate it with care, if at all, and be ready to quickly veer away from it if needed. Common in-game limits apply to topics such as intraparty romance, sex, exploitation, racism, enslavement, and violence toward children and animals. Limits can also apply to certain creatures, such as spiders, snakes, rats, and demons. It's also important to discuss limits around what harm might befall characters, including mind-control magic, helplessness, and death. That said, D&D is a game that has in-world con- flicts and mayhem. Certain core elements of the game are difficult to ignore. For example, taking damage isn't a limit you can work around easily. Similarly, character death is something that hap- pens from time to time, though the game has ways to counteract or avoid it (see "Death" in chapter 3 for suggestions). a a UsING THE GAME EXPECTATIONS SHEET The Game Expectations tracking sheet is a tool you can use to set expectations at the start of a game and ensure the game is fun for everyone. Before distributing the sheet to players, fill in the two topmost boxes: Game Theme and Flavor. In this box, broadly de- scribe the direction you envision for your game. See the "Setting Expectations" section for the kinds of information to include here. Potentially Sensitive Elements. If you know that some elements of the game might run up against some players' limits, list those elements in this box. See the "Hard and Soft Limits" sec- tion for examples. Once the above information is added, give a copy of the sheet to each player. Players can fill out their sheets anonymously, but ask each of them to add the following information: Limits. Using an X for a hard limit or a question mark for a soft limit, indicate any potentially sensitive elements that are problematic. Add any other elements to avoid. Hopes, Expectations, and Concerns. In the last two boxes, share any hopes and expectations for the game, and list any concerns about behavior at the table. Collect all the sheets, and gather your players' limits into a separate, anonymous document the whole group can access. \~ --- \_ # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS 15 # Aren't Always Bad, But They Can # Get In The Way Of The Game ie oe Communicating Limits. Make sure everyone is comfortable with how the discussion of limits takes place. Players might not want to discuss limits aloud, especially if they're new to roleplaying games or haven't spent a lot of time with other members of the group. One way to alleviate such discomfort is to provide a way for players to share limits anon- ymously. Everyone can jot down their limits on an anonymous survey, such as the Game Expectations tracking sheet in this chapter. Compile limits into a list that can be shared with the group. Limits aren't negotiable, and everyone in the group needs to respect them. The start of a campaign is a great time to have this discussion, but further discussion is warranted each time a new player joins the group or when the campaign has a shift in story or tone. Someone might cross a line and need to be reminded of a limit, or someone might not think to include some of their limits in the initial discussion. Players can also discover new limits as the campaign unfolds. Check in with the group every few sessions to make sure everyone's comfortable with how the game is developing, updating the group's limits as needed. Shifting Limits. Encourage players to bring any additional limits to you, privately or in the mo- ment, so you can add them to the list. Trust that # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS - | OF fs 5 ye) " =. PS a4 --- ~\*~ ee. ¢ =\~ ' a a".. y, ' \> an ye \> f - =. \<\< a y. i, 3 a, ' F; W %. ' ym = \] eed oat Li. A m4: "1 ) a } Sah, ' \| x \~ \| AE 4 = f y 4 CONFLICTS BETWEEN CHARACTERS --- players know their needs best, and update the game accordingly. Limits in Play. Since D&D is improvisational, the game can go in unexpected directions. It's helpful to have an agreed-on signal that players can use to communicate that a limit has been violated, allowing you to adjust quickly. That signal might be a gesture (such as crossing the arms in an X or raising a palm in a "stop" gesture), a code word or phrase, touching or lifting a designated object, or anything else your group agrees on. Players should also feel safe to say "stop" and pause the game until the issue is resolved. The person who invokes the signals can comment on what they want adjusted but doesn't have to explain why the content is objectionable. The signal shouldn't trigger a debate or discussion: thank the player for being honest about their needs, set the scene right, and move on. Make it clear to players that if a person isn't com- fortable using the signal, they can step away from the game or call for a break to talk to you privately. Players may also give a friend permission to use the signal on their behalf. As the DM, lead by example. Take your players' needs seriously, and use every tool at your disposal to adjust how your shared story plays out. # Intra-party Conflict When there's conflict between characters in an ad- venturing party, it's usually a sign that one of three things is going on: Disruptive Player. A player is exhibiting antisocial behavior in the game. How to deal with it is cov- ered in the "Antisocial Behavior" section. Player Conflict. Conflicts between characters sometimes surface conflicts between players. These conflicts are best handled away from the gaming table. Encourage the players to resolve their conflict outside the game. If that conflict keeps arising at the game table, you might need to ask them to step away from the campaign for a while or leave the game entirely. Roleplaying. Conflicts between characters aren't always bad. It's OK for characters (and players) to disagree about how to deal with a captured en- emy or which side to back in a brewing war. If the disagreement gets too heated, take a break and perhaps discuss, out of character, how the players would like to proceed. If you can't tell which of these dynamics is in play, have a conversation with the players about it. # Respect For The Players Your players need to know from the start that you'll run a game that is fun, fair, and tailored for them; that you'll allow each of them to contribute to the story; and that you'll pay attention to them when they take their turns. Your players also count on you to make sure an adventure's threats don't target them personally. Never make players feel uncom- fortable or threatened. # Sharing The Spotlight As the DM, don't play favorites. Don't let one player do all the talking, and make sure you check in about a Do You REALLy Do THaT? Can players retract what they just said their char- acters did? Some DMs take a hard-line position: "If you said it, your character did it." Such a strict position tends to make players much more care- ful about what they say, which can dampen the atmosphere and discourage humor. Other DMs let players change their minds freely. This creates a more relaxed mood at the table, which might slow the pace of the game. Acommon compromise is to rule that players can retract or change anything their characters did up until the point they learn the consequences of their actions. Once you describe what happens as a result, it's too late for the players to change their minds. what every character is doing, especially during periods of exploration and social interaction, rather than focusing just on one player's character. Sometimes you'll encounter players who tell other players what their characters should do, claim the best magic items for themselves, bully the other players, and refuse to share the spotlight. Away from the game, point out that the player's behavior is spoiling the fun for others, and ask the player to tone it down. If the player refuses to change this behavior, ask the player to leave the group. Some problems arise when a player assumes that their particular style of play is superior to others, and they lose patience with encounters tailored to other players' preferences. Remind the impatient player (perhaps away from the table) that you have a group to please, not just one player. # Tragic Limits Some players resist getting invested in the world of the game because they don't want to endure the pain of seeing the people and places they care about threatened or destroyed. Other players gleefully detail a backstory full of beloved NPCs, fully ex- pecting the DM to use those people as bait, tragic victims, and unexpected villains. It's important to understand your players' preferences so you neither alienate the players by callously destroying what they love nor bore them by leaving their backstory out of the campaign story. When you have antagonists threaten the people and places the characters love, be sure the charac- ters have a chance to stave off the worst outcome. During the game, characters should have the op- portunity to avoid or mitigate losses in heroic ways, with tragedy being a consequence of the characters' actions and decisions, not a foregone conclusion. Moments of helplessness in the face of devastating tragedy are better suited for character backstories. DM Dte ROLLING Should you hide your die rolls behind a DM screen, or should you roll your dice in the open for all the players to see? Choose either approach, and be con- sistent. Each approach has benefits: Hidden Die Rolls. Hiding your die rolls keeps them mysterious and allows you to alter results if you want to. For example, you could ignore a Critical Hit to save a character's life. Don't alter die rolls too often, though, and never let the players know when you fudge a die roll. Visible Die Rolls. Rolling dice in the open demon- strates impartiality---you're not fudging rolls to the characters' benefit or detriment. Even if you usually roll behind a screen, it can be fun to make an especially dramatic roll where everyone can see it. CHAPTER1\|THE BASICS 17 re \<i a & t ------ 18 OVERLY CAUTIOUS PlayerS Overly cautious players can slow down the game by checking every flagstone, door, and wall in a dun- geon for traps and hidden dangers. Sometimes this behavior is a learned response to too many unpleas- ant surprises in past adventures, and sometimes it's just a manifestation of players' personalities. Here are some in-game techniques you can use to encourage your players to act boldly: Avoid Random Perils, Avoid traps and ambushes that feel random and have little importance to the rest of the adventure. Create Time Pressure. Set up a situation where the characters are racing toward a goal or destination. (Use this technique with caution, as time pressure can increase players' anxiety.) Telegraph Encounters. Give players advance warn- ing that an encounter is imminent. Maybe they hear the heavy footfalls of a giant or see a dragon flying overhead before they have to confront it. This can encourage your players to move toward or away from the encounters rather than anx- iously anticipating an ambush. If these in-game techniques don't have the desired effect, have a conversation outside the game with your players about which game elements are caus- ing them to play in an overly cautious way. Come to an agreement that those elements won't appear in your game, as keeping the game moving will result in a better experience. # Respect For The Dm As the DM, you have the right to expect your play- ers to respect you and the effort you put into mak- ing a fun game for everyone. The players need to let you direct the campaign (with their input), arbitrate the rules, and settle arguments. And when you're narrating the action of the game, the players should be paying attention. # Player Die Rolling Players should roll their dice in full view of every- one. If a player scoops up their dice before anyone else can see what they rolled, encourage that player to be less secretive. When a die falls on the floor, do you count it or reroll it? When it lands cocked against a book, do you pull the book away and see where it lands or reroll the die? Work with your players to answer these questions, and record the answers as house rules. THE SOCIAL CONTRACT OF ADVENTURES You must provide reasonably appealing reasons for characters to undertake the adventures you prepare. (See "Draw In the Players" in chapter 4 # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS nem ee pitta me for advice on this topic.) In exchange, the players should go along with those hooks. It's OK for your players to give you some pushback on why their characters should want to do what you're asking them to do, but it's not OK for them to invalidate the hard work you've done preparing the adventure by willfully going in a different direction. If you feel like you're keeping up your end of the bargain but your players aren't, have a conversa- tion with them away from the gaming table. Try to understand what hooks would motivate their char- acters, and make sure the players understand the work you put into preparing adventures for them. RuLEs Discussions Work out a policy about rules discussions at the table. Some groups don't mind putting the game on hold while they discuss different interpretations of arule, Others prefer to let the DM make a call and continue playing. If you gloss over a rules issue in play, make a note of it and return to the issue later. Some players like to use the rules to argue against your decisions. While such players can be helpful when you're stuck or make a rules mistake that's easily corrected, players who argue the rules too often can disrupt the flow of the game. If a player wants to pause play to find a specific rule or reference, you can invite the player to search for it while you and the rest of the players continue the game. That player's character essentially steps out of the game for as long as it takes. Monsters don't attack the character, and the character takes the Dodge action in combat until the player rejoins the group. This solution allows the other players to keep playing instead of letting one player stop the game. # Character Knowledge Encourage players to play their characters within the limits of what the characters know and under- stand. It can be helpful to maintain the distinction between player and character knowledge by simply asking players, "What do your characters think?" Anachronistic thinking is another potential pit- fall. You might need to remind players that their characters don't know how to make things that don't exist in the game world, such as modern fire- arms or antibiotics, and they don't have the players' understanding of modern science (which might not apply in the game universe anyway). Similarly, sometimes a player is familiar with the published adventure you're running or knows the Monster Manual backward and forward. Encourage the player to keep that knowledge separate from their character's knowledge and allow the other players to discover it through play. # Antisocial Behavior People often play D&D because it lets them, through their characters, do things they can't do in real life---fight monsters, cast spells, and so on. However, for some players, this means wreaking havoc in towns or betraying their allies. What they want in the game has nothing to do with heroic adventure, but with using the game rules to act out antisocial fantasies. If this behavior comes up in your game, it might be time to reopen the conversation about the kind of game you want to play. If it's just one player causing the trouble, it's perfectly appropriate to issue an ultimatum: an out-of-control player who wants to continue playing with the group must stop being disruptive and play as part of a team. Don't let players get away with being jerks to the other players using the excuse, "that's what my character would do." Evil Characters. Players who want to play evil characters might be looking to carry out antisocial behavior in the game. If a player asks for permis- sion to play an evil character or comes to the table with one already made, talk to that player about what they have in mind and make sure their plans square with the group's expectations for your game. Sometimes a player wants to explore playing an evil character for perfectly good (and nondisruptive) reasons, and sometimes a whole group decides it might be fun to play evil characters together. These are valid options, as long as everyone's on the same page about how the campaign will go. # Players Exploiting The Rules Some players enjoy poring over the D&D rules and looking for optimal combinations. This kind of opti- mizing is part of the game (see "Know Your Players" in chapter 2), but it can cross a line into being exploitative, interfering with everyone else's fun. a coal # Knowing The Rules You don't have to be an expert on the rules to be a good DM. Of course it's helpful to be familiar with the rules, especially the ones in the Player's Handbook, but facilitating fun is more important than implementing the rules perfectly. If you're not sure how to apply the rules in a situation, you can always ask the opinion of the players as a group. It might take a few minutes, but it's usually possible to reach an answer that feels fair to everyone, and that's more important than a "correct" answer. You don't need to know every spell in the Play- er's Handbook or the features of every class. Set the expectation that players are responsible for telling you what their abilities and spells do. Setting clear expectations is essential when deal- ing with this kind of rules exploitation. Bear these principles in mind: Rules Aren't Physics. The rules of the game are meant to provide a fun game experience, not to describe the laws of physics in the worlds of D&D, let alone the real world. Don't let players argue that a bucket brigade of ordinary people can accelerate a spear to light speed by all using the Ready action to pass the spear to the next person in line. The Ready action facilitates heroic action; it doesn't define the physical limitations of what can happen in a 6-second combat round. The Game Is Not an Economy. The rules of the game aren't intended to model a realistic economy, and players who look for loopholes that let them generate infinite wealth using combinations of spells are exploiting the rules. Combat Is for Enemies. Some rules apply only during combat or while a character is acting in Initiative order. Don't let players attack each other or helpless creatures to activate those rules. Rules Rely on Good-Faith Interpretation. The rules assume that everyone reading and interpret- ing the rules has the interests of the group's fun at heart and is reading the rules in that light. Outlining these principles can help hold players' exploits at bay. If a player persistently tries to twist the rules of the game, have a conversation with that player outside the game and ask them to stop. # Rules For The Virtual Table Setting expectations is just as important in a digital environment as in person. Some groups confine out-of-character jokes, comments, and memes to a text channel, keeping the voice channel focused on the game. But some groups find it distracting to have a separate conver- sation unfolding in text while the game is going on. Choose an option that works best for your group. Who moves tokens on a virtual tabletop? Are players expected to use the built-in dice roller, or is it OK to roll physical dice and report the result? The particular technology you're using might dictate answers to these questions or raise other questions you'll need to sort out as you play. # CHAPTER \| THE BASICS 19 THE FIENDISH VILLAIN VENGER Uses A Crysrar Bart TO SCRY ON HIS # Nemesis, Tiamat. # Chapter 2 # Running The Game chapter 1, this chapter goes into more depth on running a D&D game as Dungeon Master. KNOw YOUR PlayerS While your players' role is to create characters (the protagonists of the campaign), breathe life into them, and steer the campaign through their actions, your role as Dungeon Master is to keep the players immersed in the world you've created and to give the characters the opportunity to do awesome things. Knowing what your players enjoy most about the D&D game helps you create and run adventures that they will enjoy and remember. Once you know which of the following activities each player in your group enjoys, you can tailor adventures to your players' preferences. It's rare to gather a table of players who all enjoy the same aspects of the game. The trick is to find a balance so everyone can get some enjoyment out of each game session, even if certain encounters don't match their preferences. At best, a group of players is a lot like their characters, in that having different interests and capabilities enables them to handle a broad range of challenges. # R Uilding On The Basics Laid Out In ACTING Players who enjoy acting like to embody their characters' personalities, perspectives, and atti- tudes. They might like dressing up or using their characters' voices while playing. They enjoy social interactions with NPCs, monsters, and their fellow party members. Engage players who like acting by... - Giving them opportunities to develop their characters' personalities and backgrounds. - Allowing them to interact regularly with NPCs. - Highlighting the roleplaying elements of combat encounters. - Incorporating elements from their characters' backstories into your adventures. EXPLORING Players who desire exploration want to experience the wonders that a fantasy world has to offer. They want to know what's around the next corner or hill and like to find hidden clues and treasure. Engage players who like exploration by... - Dropping clues that hint at things yet to come. - Letting them find things when they take the time to explore. - Providing evocative descriptions of exciting envi- ronments and using interesting maps and props. - Giving monsters secrets for the players to uncover or cultural details for them to learn. FIGHTING Players who enjoy fantasy combat like the excite- ment of battling villains and monsters. They thrive in situations that can best be resolved in combat, fa- voring bold action over negotiation or investigation. Engage players who like fighting by... - Springing unexpected combat encounters. - Vividly describing the havoc their characters wreak with their attacks and spells. - Including combat encounters with large numbers of less powerful monsters. INSTIGATING Players who like to instigate action are eager to make things happen, even if that means taking per- ilous risks. They would rather rush headlong into danger and face the consequences than cautiously plan their actions. Engage players who like to instigate by... - Allowing their actions to affect the environment. - Including things in your adventures to tempt them. - Letting their actions put the characters in a tight spot. - Including encounters with NPCs who are as feisty and unpredictable as the players are. OPTIMIZING Players who enjoy optimizing their characters' capabilities like to fine-tune their characters for peak performance by gaining levels, new features, and magic items. They welcome any opportunity to demonstrate their characters' excellence. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME Engage players who like optimization by... - Using desired magic items as adventure hooks and rewards. - Including encounters that let them leverage their characters' most potent abilities. - Providing quantifiable rewards, like Experience Points, for noncombat encounters. PROBLEM-SOLVING Players who want to solve problems like to scruti- nize NPC motivations, untangle a villain's machina- tions, solve puzzles, and come up with plans. Engage players who like to solve problems by... - Including puzzles and tricky situations that require thinking. » Rewarding planning and tactics with in-game benefits. - Creating NPCs with complex motives. SOCIALIZING Many groups include players who come to the game primarily because they enjoy the social event and want to spend time with their friends, not because they're especially invested in any part of the actual game. These players want to participate, but they tend not to care whether they're deeply immersed in the adventure, and they don't tend to be assertive or very involved in the details of the game, rules, or story. As a rule, don't try to force these players to be more involved than they want to be. STORYTELLING Players who love storytelling want to contribute to a narrative. They like it when their characters are heavily involved in an unfolding story, and they enjoy encounters that are tied to and expand an overarching plot. Engage players who like storytelling by... - Using their characters' backstories to shape the stories of the campaign. - Making sure encounters advance the story. - Making their characters' actions steer future events. - Giving NPCs characteristics and connections that the adventurers can explore to uncover new ad- venture opportunities. - Including plot elements that call back to decisions the adventurers made earlier. # Different Players Envoy DIFFERENT ASPECTS OF PLAYING D&D GROUP SIZE D&D's rules and published adventures generally assume four to six players plus the DM. The follow- ing advice helps you adjust adventures to work for smaller or larger groups. SMALL Groups A group that contains fewer than four players might find combat encounters difficult, especially if the party lacks important capabilities (such as armored characters to stand toe-to-toe with enemies or healing magic to keep everyone alive). You can com- pensate by reducing the number of monsters in a combat encounter or by giving the party resources they need, such as Potions of Healing. You can also add party members, as described in the sections that follow. DM-CONTROLLED ADVENTURER You can make an adventurer character of your own (sometimes called a "DM PC"---a "Dungeon Master player character") to accompany the party. This is a rewarding way for you to roleplay with your friends while they're exploring your world, but keep in mind that you'll have to run this NPC in combat. Be sure to keep the players' characters in the spot- light, and don't take away the players' agency by having your character make decisions for the group. NPC Party MEMBERS You can add nonplayer characters (NPCs) to the adventuring party. Use the NPC stat blocks in the Monster Manual to represent these supporting char- acters. If you don't want to run these NPCs yourself, invite one or more of your players to take on an NPC as a secondary character. These NPCs might be apprentices or employees of the adventurers, so it's natural for the main characters to take the lead in exploration and social interactions while the NPCs fade into the background. See "Nonplayer Characters" in chapter 3 for more information. PlayerS WITH MULTIPLE CHARACTERS One or more of your players can each play two characters. Running two characters at once is a challenge, so make sure those players are comfort- able taking on multiple characters. This approach works best in a game that's focused on combat, since it fills out a party with combat-capable characters. It can be difficult for a player to roleplay two characters at once. You might suggest that the player focus on roleplaying one character while relegating the other character to a supporting role. # Large Groups The biggest considerations with large groups are maintaining order at the table and keeping combat from becoming too slow. ParTY LEADER Consider having the players designate a party leader, who is then the only person who tells you what the group is doing. It becomes the leader's role to work with the rest of the players to find consen- sus on what the group will do. # Speeding Combat Players who have to wait a long time between their characters' turns in combat are susceptible to dis- traction. Consider these tips to speed combat with a large group. Be Generous with Information. If you tell the play- ers what the Armor Class of their opponents is, you reduce the steps of interaction needed to resolve an attack. Instead of telling you a number and asking if it hits, a player can simply tell you that an attack hits and how much damage it deals, perhaps adding some narration for good measure (see "Narration in Combat" later in this chapter). In the same way, if you know each character's AC, you don't need to ask whether a monster's attack hits. Help Players Keep Up. If a player isn't sure what to do on their turn in combat, help the player decide by offering a quick recap of the state of the battle. How many foes are still standing, and how hurt do they look? What's the most immediate threat to that character? Make Initiative Obvious. Display the Initiative order to your players so they each know when their character's turn is coming up and can think ahead about what their character will do on their next turn. Using Initiative scores (see "Running Combat" in this chapter)---and perhaps seating the players in Initiative order---can be helpful with a large group. Roll Handfuls of Dice. Encourage players to roll the dice for their attack rolls and their damage at the same time. You can do the same. # Structured Turns If you find yourself in a situation where individual players are having trouble getting a chance to do things during exploration or social interaction, have the characters roll Initiative and act in Initiative or- der, just as you do in combat. Taking turns ensures that everyone has the chance to do something. Use this approach sparingly, as it can feel artificial and sometimes slows down the game. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME 23 an RV PTC ee PE - ate i AOVENTURES REQUIRING STEALTH, LIKE THIS INFILTRATION, ARE (OBAL FOR SOME SMALL PARTIES OF ADVENTURERS 3 Po 24 beg TAN ve 9) # Absent Players When one of your players is absent, what do you do with that player's character? Consider the following options: Fading into the Background. Have the character simply fade into the background. This requires ev- eryone to step out of the game world a bit and sus- pend disbelief, but it might be the easiest solution. Act as if the character were absent, but don't try to come up with any in-game explanation. Mon- sters don't attack the character, who returns the favor. On returning, the player resumes playing as if the absence never happened. Narrative Contrivance. Decide the character is elsewhere while the rest of the party continues the adventure. Come up with in-game reasons for the character to temporarily leave the party and rejoin later, such as following up on a rumor or reporting back to the party's patron. Substitute Player. With the absent player's consent, have another player run the missing player's char- acter, or run the character yourself if you feel you can do so. Whoever runs the character will need a copy of that character's character sheet and should strive to keep the character alive and use that character's resources wisely. # CHAPTER \| RUNNING THE GAME Give absent characters the same XP that the other characters earned each session, keeping the group at the same level. Some groups like to work out a policy regarding how many missing players is too many to proceed, For example, your group might play as long as no more than one person is absent. If two or more peo- ple can't attend a session, consider playing a short adventure with different characters, and perhaps a different Dungeon Master, or bring out a favorite board game. # Incorporating New Players When introducing a new player to the group, revisit the group's expectations and limits (see "Ensuring Fun for All" in chapter 1). Then have the new player create a character who is the same level as the other characters in the adventuring party. If the new player has never played D&D before and the rest of the group is higher than level 4, consider taking a short break from the campaign and having everyone play a new level 1 character for a session or two while the new player learns the ropes. (This can also be a good opportunity for an- other player to take a turn as DM.) If you're incorporating a new character into the group in the middle of an adventure, work with that character's player to come up with a story hook for --------- ss C---S how their character joins the group, and make sure the player is happy with the choice. Suggested story hooks include the following: Long-Lost Friend. The new character is a friend or relative of one of the adventurers. Alternatively, the new character is connected to the adventur- ers' patron or a member of an organization the other characters are linked to. In either case, the new character has been searching for the group, perhaps bearing important news. Rescued Prisoner. The new character is a pris- oner of the foes the other characters are fighting. When rescued, this character joins their group. Sole Survivor. The new character is the sole sur- vivor of an ill-fated group of adventurers. The new character might be able to offer a clue to help the party avoid the same grim fate that befell the other group.