# CHAPTER \| BASTIONS 341; 342 a meeting room where members of your guild can discuss important matters in your presence. Your guild has roughly fifty members made up of skilled folk who live and work outside your Bastion, usually in nearby settlements. Recruit: Guild Assignment. Each time you issue the Recruit order to this facility, you commission the facility's hireling to recruit guild members to per- form a special assignment. Each guild in the Sample Guilds table specifies the nature of that assignment. With your DM's permission and help, you can cre- ate new assignments for guild members to complete. LABORATORY Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Craft A Laboratory contains storage space for alchem- ical supplies and workspaces for crafting various concoctions. Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Craft: Alchemist's Supplies. The facility's hireling crafts anything that can be made with Alchemist's Supplies, using the rules in the Player's Handbook and chapter 7 of this book. # A Cauldron Is Standaro Equipment In A Potion Brewer's Laboratory # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS Craft: Poison. You commission the facility's hire- ling to craft a vial containing one application of a poison. The poison must be one of the following: Burnt Othur Fumes, Essence of Ether, or Torpor. This work takes 7 days, and you must pay half the poison's cost. See "Poison" in chapter 3 for de- scriptions and costs of poisons. LIBRARY Level 5 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Research This Library contains a collection of books plus one or more desks and reading chairs. Research: Topical Lore. When you issue the Re- search order to this facility, you commission the facility's hireling to research a topic. The topic can be a legend, a known event or location, a person of significance, a type of creature, or a famous object. The work takes 7 days. When the research concludes, the hireling obtains up to three accurate pieces of information about the topic that were pre- viously unknown to you and shares this knowledge with you the next time you speak with them. The DM determines what information you learn. MEDITATION CHAMBER Level 13 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Cramped Hirelings: 1 Order: Empower A Meditation Chamber is a relaxing space that helps align one's mind, body, and spirit. Empower: Inner Peace. When you issue the Em- power order to this facility, your Bastion's hirelings can use the Meditation Chamber to gain a measure of inner peace. The next time you roll for a Bastion event, you can roll twice and choose either result. Fortify Self. You can meditate in this facility over a period of 7 days. If you leave the Bastion during this time, you gain no benefit. Otherwise, at the end of the seventh day, you gain Advantage on two kinds of saving throws for the next 7 days, deter- mined randomly by rolling on the table below. Re- roll if you get a duplicate result. 1d6 Saving Throw 1d6 Saving Throw 1 Strength 4 Intelligence 2 Dexterity Wisdom Constitution 6 Charisma RESEARCH MENAGERIE Level 13 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Vast Hirelings: 2 Order: Recruit A Menagerie has enclosures big enough to contain up to four Large creatures. Four Small or Medium creatures can occupy the same space as one Large creature there. Recruit: Creature, When you issue the Recruit order to this facility, you commission the facility's hirelings to add a creature from the Menagerie Creatures table to your Menagerie, The recruitment takes 7 days and costs you the amount listed in the table. The hirelings look after the creature, Creatures in your Menagerie count as Bastion Defenders. Deduct any you lose from your Bastion Defenders roster. You can choose not to count one or more of these creatures as Bastion Defenders, in which case they can't be called on to defend the Bas- tion. Instead, they act in accordance with their na- ture and use their stat blocks in the Monster Manual. THE BOOKS IN YouR LiBRARY HOLD A WEALTH OF LORE THAT A HIRELING CAN # Menagerie Creatures Creature Size Cost Ape Medium 500 GP Black Bear Medium 500 GP Brown Bear Large 1,000 GP Constrictor Snake Large 250 GP Crocodile Large 500 GP Dire Wolf Large 1,000 GP Giant Vulture Large 1,000 GP Hyena Medium 50 GP Jackal Small 50 GP Lion Large 1,000 GP Owlbear Large 3,500 GP Panther Medium 250 GP Tiger Large 1,000 GP With the DM's consent, you can add different crea- tures than those shown in the Menagerie Creatures table to your Menagerie. The cost of a creature depends on its Challenge Rating, as shown on the Creature Costs by Challenge Rating table. Typically only Beasts and some Monstrosities can be kept in a Menagerie, though the DM might allow other creatures. CREATURE CosTs BY CHALLENGE RATING Challenge Challenge Rating Cost Rating Cost 0 or 1/8 50 GP \] 1,000 GP 1/4 250 GP 2 2,000 GP 1/2 500 GP 3 3,500 GP OBSERVATORY Level 13 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: Ability to use a Spellcasting Focus Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Empower Situated atop your Bastion, your Observatory con- tains a telescope aimed at the night sky. Observatory Charm. You can use your Observa- tory to peer into the far corners of Wildspace and the Astral Plane. After spending a Long Rest in your Observatory, you gain a magical Charm (see "Supernatural Gifts" in chapter 3) that lasts for 7 days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to cast Contact Other Plane without expending a spell slot. You can't gain this Charm again while you still have it. # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS 343 \; r Empower: Eldritch Discovery. When you issue the Empower order to this facility, you enable yourself or the facility's hireling to explore the eldritch mys- teries of the stars for 7 consecutive nights. At the end of that time, roll a die. If the number rolled is even, nothing is gained. If the number rolled is odd, an unknown power bestows one of the following Charms on you or another creature of your choice that is on the same plane of existence as you: Charm of Darkvision, Charm of Heroism, or Charm of Vitality (all described in chapter 3). PuB Level 13 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Research Folks come here to consume tasty beverages and socialize. Your Pub might be a bar, coffee shop, or tea room, and it might have a colorful name, such as the Rusty Flagon or the Dragon's Loft. The facility's hireling, who serves as the bartender, maintains a network of spies scattered throughout nearby com- munities. These spies are useful sources of informa- tion and frequent the Pub, often incognito. Research: Information Gathering. When you issue the Research order to this facility, you commission the Pub's bartender to gather information from spies who are aware of important events happen- ing within 10 miles of your Bastion over the next 7 days. During that time, these spies can divulge the location of any creature that is familiar to you, provided the creature is within 50 miles of your Bastion and not hidden by magic or confined to a location that the DM deems is beyond the spy network's ability to locate. If the spies learn the target's location, they also learn where that creature has been for the previous 7 days. Pub Special. The Pub has one magical beverage on tap, chosen from the options below: Bigby's Burden. Drinking a pint of this beverage grants you the "enlarge" effect of an Enlarge/Re- duce spell that has a duration of 24 hours (no sav- ing throw allowed). Kiss of the Spider Queen. Drinking a pint of this beverage grants you the effect of a Spider Climb spell that has a duration of 24 hours. Moonlight Serenade. Drinking a pint of this bev- erage gives you Darkvision out to 60 feet for 24 hours. If you already have Darkvision, its range is extended by 60 feet for the same duration. Positive Reinforcement. Drinking a pint of this beverage gives you Resistance to Necrotic damage for 24 hours. # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS oom a5 ae te eee if ' Sterner Stuff. For 24 hours after drinking a pint of this beverage, you automatically succeed on saving throws to avoid or end the Frightened condition. At the start of a Bastion turn, you can switch to one of the other options. Your DM may create new op- tions. A pint of this magical beverage loses its magic 24 hours after it's poured. Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Pub to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you do so, the Pub can have two magical beverages from the Pub Special list on tap at a time. A Vast Pub gains three additional hirelings, for a total of four. These new hirelings are servers. Assign names and per- sonalities to them as you see fit. RELIQUARY Level 13 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus Space: Cramped Hirelings: 1 Order: Harvest This vault holds sacred objects. Reliquary Charm. After spending a Long Rest in your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see "Su- pernatural Gifts" in chapter 3) that lasts for 7 days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to cast Greater Restoration once without expending a spell slot or using Material components. You can't gain this Charm again while you still have it. Harvest: Talisman. When you issue the Harvest order to this facility, you commission its hireling to produce a specially prepared talisman for your use. The talisman usually takes the form of an amulet, a rune-carved box, or a statuette, but it can be any Tiny, nonmagical object that has religious signifi- cance. The work takes 7 days and costs no money. You can use this talisman in place of one spell's Material components, provided the components have a cost of 1,000 GP or less. If the spell normally con- sumes its components, the talisman isn't consumed. After the talisman has been used in this way, it can't be used again until you return it to your Reliquary and use another Harvest order to prepare it. SAGCRISTY Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Craft A Sacristy serves as a preparation and storage room for the sacred items and religious vestments. Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Craft: Holy Water. You commission the facility's hireling to craft a flask of Holy Water. The work takes 7 days and costs no money. You can spend GP during the creation process to increase the potency of the Holy Water. For every 100 GP you spend, up to a maximum of 500 GP, the damage dealt by the Holy Water increases by 1d8. Craft: Magic Item (Relic). You commission the fa- cility's hireling to craft a Common or an Uncom- mon magic item chosen by you from the Relics ta- bles in chapter 7. The facility has the tool required to craft the item, and the hireling has proficiency with that tool as well as proficiency in the Arcana skill. See the "Crafting Magic Items" section in chapter 7 for the time and money that must be spent to craft the item. If the item allows its user to cast any spells from it, you must craft the item yourself (the facility's hireling can assist), and you must have all those spells prepared every day you spend crafting the item. Spell Refreshment. Having a Sacristy allows you to regain one expended spell slot of level 5 or lower after spending an entire Short Rest in your Bastion. You can't gain this benefit again until you finish a Long Rest. SANCTUARY Level 5 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus Space: Roomy Hirelings: \| Order: Craft Icons of your religion are displayed in this facility, which includes a quiet place for worship. Sanctuary Charm. After spending a Long Rest in your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see "Supernatural Gifts" in chapter 3) that lasts for 7 days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to cast Healing Word once without expending a spell 2) | slot. You can't gain this Charm again while you still have it. Craft: Sacred Focus. When you issue the Craft order to this facility, you commission the facility's hireling to craft a Druidic Focus (wooden staff) or a Holy Symbol. The work takes 7 days and costs no money. The item remains in your Bastion until you claim it. SANCTUM Level 17 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: Ability to use a Holy Symbol or Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus Space: Roomy Hirelings: 4 Order: Empower A Sanctum is a place of solace and healing. Sanctum Charm. After spending a Long Rest in your Bastion, you gain a magical Charm (see "Su- pernatural Gifts" in chapter 3) that lasts for 7 days or until you use it. The Charm allows you to cast Heal once without expending a spell slot. You can't gain this Charm again while you still have it. Empower: Fortifying Rites. When you issue the Empower order to this facility, you inspire its hirelings to perform daily rites that benefit you or another character you name. The beneficiary doesn't need to be in the Bastion when the rites are performed to gain their benefit. Each time the ben- eficiary finishes a Long Rest, they gain Temporary Hit Points equal to your level. This effect lasts for 7 days. Sanctum Recall. While the Sanctum exists, you always have the Word of Recall spell prepared. Whenever you cast Word of Recall, you can make your Sanctum the destination of the spell instead of another place you have previously designated. In addition, one creature of your choice that arrives in the Sanctum via this spell gains the benefit of a Heal spell. # A Scriptorium Was Desks And Supplies For Crafting Books, Scrolls, And # Other Paperwork SCRIPTORIUM Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Craft A Scriptorium contains desks and writing supplies. Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Craft: Book Replica. You commission the facility's hireling to make a copy of a nonmagical Book. Doing so requires a blank book. The work takes 7 days. Craft: Spell Scroll. You commission the facility's hireling to scribe a Spell Scroll containing one Cleric or Wizard spell of level 3 or lower. The facility has the necessary Calligrapher''s Supplies, and the hireling meets all the prerequisites needed to scribe the scroll. The "Crafting Equipment" section in the Player's Handbook specifies the time needed to scribe the scroll and the cost of the scroll, which you must pay. Craft: Paperwork. You commission the facility's hireling to create up to fifty copies of a broad- sheet, a pamphlet, or another loose-leaf paper product. The work takes 7 days and costs you 1 GP per copy. At no additional cost in time or money, the facility's hireling can distribute the paper- work to one or more locations within 50 miles of your Bastion. SMITHY Level 5 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 2 Order: Craft This Smithy contains a forge, an anvil, and other tools needed to craft weapons, armor, and other equipment. Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Craft: Smith's Tools. The facility's hirelings craft anything that can be made with Smith's Tools, us- ing the rules in the Player's Handbook. Craft: Magic Item (Armament). If you are level 9+, can you commission the facility's hirelings to craft a Common or an Uncommon magic item chosen by you from the Armaments tables in chapter 7. The facility has the tool required to craft the item, and the hirelings have proficiency with that tool as well as proficiency in the Arcana skill. See the "Crafting Magic Items" section in chapter 7 for the time and money that must be spent to craft the item. If the item allows its user to cast any spells from it, you must craft the item yourself (the facility's hirelings can assist), and you must have all those spells prepared every day you spend crafting the item. STABLE Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Trade A Bastion can have more than one Stable. Each Sta- ble you add to your Bastion comes with one Riding Horse or Camel and two Ponies or Mules; see the Player's Handbook or the Monster Manual for these creatures' stat blocks. The facility is big enough to house three Large animals. Two Medium creatures occupy the same amount of space as one Large creature there. The facility's hireling looks after these creatures. After a Beast that can serve as a mount spends at least 14 days in this facility, all Wisdom (Animal Handling) checks made with respect to it have Advantage. Trade: Animals. When you issue the Trade order to this facility, you commission the facility's hireling to buy or sell one or more mounts at normal cost, keeping the ones you buy in your Stable. The work takes 7 days, and the DM decides what types of animals are available for purchase---horses, ponies, and mules being the most common. The Mounts and Other Animals table in the Player's Handbook gives standard prices for various mounts. You bear the total cost of any purchases. When you sell a mount from your Stable, the buyer pays you 20 percent more than the standard price; this profit increases to 50 percent when you reach level 13 and 100 percent when you reach level 17. Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Sta- ble to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you do so, the Stable is large enough to house six Large animals. STOREHOUSE Level 5 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Trade A Storehouse is a cool, dark space meant to contain objects from the Trade Goods table in chapter 7 and from chapter 6 of the Player's Handbook. Trade: Goods. When you issue the Trade order to this facility, its hireling spends the next 7 days pro- curing nonmagical items that have a total value of 500 GP or less and stores them in the Storehouse, or the hireling uses those 7 days to sell goods in the Storehouse. You bear the total cost of any pur- chases, and the maximum value of the items purchased increases to 2,000 GP when you reach level 9 and 5,000 GP when you reach level 13. When you sell goods from your Storehouse, the buyer pays you 10 percent more than the standard price; this profit increases to 20 percent when you reach level 9, 50 percent when you reach level 13, and 100 percent when you reach level 17. 'TELEPORTATION CIRCLE Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Recruit Inscribed on the floor of this room is a permanent teleportation circle created by the Teleportation Cir- cle spell. Recruit: Spellcaster. Each time you issue the Re- cruit order to this facility, its hireling extends an invitation to a Friendly NPC spellcaster. Roll any die. If the number rolled is odd, the invitee declines the invitation, and you gain no benefit from having issued the order. If the number rolled is even, the CHAPTER8\|BASTIONS 347 348 \~ me! invitee accepts the invitation and arrives in your Bastion via your Teleportation Circle. While you are in your Bastion, you can ask the spellcaster to cast one Wizard spell of level 4 or lower; if you are level 17+, the spell's maximum level increases to 8. The spellcaster is assumed to have the spell prepared. If the spell has one or more Ma- terial components that cost money, you must pay for them before the spell can be cast. The spellcaster stays for 14 days or until they cast a spell for you. The spellcaster won't defend your Bastion and departs immediately if the Bastion is attacked (see "Bastion Events" at the end of the chapter). THEATER Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Vast Hirelings: 4 Order: Empower The Theater contains a stage, a backstage area where props and sets are kept, and a seating area for a small audience. Empower: Theatrical Event. When you issue the Empower order to this facility, its hirelings be- gin work on a theatrical production or concert. Rehearsals and other preparations take 14 days, followed by at least 7 days of performances. The performances can continue indefinitely until a new production gets underway. You or another character can contribute to a pro- duction in the following ways: Composer/Writer. A character can compose music or write a script for a concert or production that hasn't started rehearsals yet. This effort takes 14 days. Conductor/Director. A character who remains in the Bastion for the entirety of the production can serve as the concert's conductor or the produc- tion's director. Performer. A character who remains in the Bastion for the entirety of the rehearsal period can be a star performer in one or more of the perfor- mances; one of the Theater's hirelings can serve as an understudy for additional performances. At the end of a rehearsal period, each character who contributed to the concert or production can make a DC 15 Charisma (Performance) check. If more of these checks succeed than fail, you and any other character who contributed to the concert or production each gain a Theater die, a d6. This die changes to a d8 when you reach level 13 and a d10 when you reach level 17. At any point after the # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS a \~ ee ------ i. ee rehearsals end, a character can expend their The- ater die to roll it and add the number rolled to one D20 Test they make, immediately after rolling the d20. If a character hasn't expended their Theater die before gaining another, their first die is lost. ------ = --- eo 'TRAINING AREA Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Vast Hirelings: 4 Order: Empower A Bastion can have more than one Training Area. A Training Area might be an open courtyard, a gymnasium, a music or dance hall, or a cleverly built gauntlet of traps and hazards. It might contain inanimate targets (for weapon practice), padded mats, and other equipment. One of the facility's hirelings is an expert trainer; the others serve as training partners. When a Training Area becomes part of your Bas- tion, choose one trainer from the Expert Trainers table. On each Bastion turn, you can replace that trainer with another one from the table. EXPERT TRAINERS Trainer Type Empower Effect Battle Expert \| When you take damage from an at- tack made with an Unarmed Strike or a weapon, you can take a Reac- tion to reduce this damage by 1d4. You gain proficiency in one of the following skills of your choice: Acrobatics, Athletics, Performance, Sleight of Hand, or Stealth. You gain proficiency with one tool of your choice. When you hit with your Unarmed Strike and deal darnage, the attack deals an extra 1d4 Bludgeoning damage. Choose a kind of Simple or Martial weapon, such as Spear or Long- bow. If you aren't proficient with the weapon, you gain proficiency with it. If you already have profi- ciency with the weapon, you can use its mastery property. Skills Expert Tools Expert Unarmed Combat Expert Weapon Expert Empower: Training. When you issue the Empower order to this facility, the facility's hirelings conduct training exercises for the next 7 days. Any character who trains here for at least 8 hours on each of those days gains a benefit at the end of the training pe- riod. The benefit depends on which trainer is pres- ent in the facility, as noted in the Expert Trainers table. The benefit lasts for 7 days. f ---\~\<---\_--- TROPHY ROOM Level 9 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 1 Order: Research This room houses a collection of mementos, such as weapons from old battles, the mounted heads of slain creatures, trinkets plucked from dungeons and ruins, and trophies passed down from ancestors. Research Options. When you issue the Research order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Research: Lore. You commission the facility's hire- ling to research a topic of your choice. The topic can be a legend, any kind of creature, or a famous object. The topic need not be directly related to items on display in the room, as the trophies provide clues to research a wide variety of other subjects. The work takes 7 days. When the re- search concludes, the hireling obtains up to three accurate pieces of information about the topic that were previously unknown to you and shares this knowledge with you the next time you speak with them. The DM determines what information is learned. Research: Trinket Trophy. You commission the facility's hireling to search for a trinket that might be of use to you. The work takes 7 days. When the research concludes, roll any die. If the number rolled is odd, the hireling finds nothing useful. If the number rolled is even, the hireling finds a magic item. Roll on the Implements---Common table in chapter 7 to determine what it is. WAR ROOM Level 17 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: Fighting Style feature or Unarmored Defense feature Space: Vast Hirelings: 2+ (see below) Order: Recruit The War Room is where you plan military actions in consultation with an inner circle of loyal lieuten- ants, each one a battle-hardened Veteran Warrior (see the Monster Manual) whose alignment matches yours. You start with two lieutenants but can add more, as described below. If your Bastion lacks facilities to house your lieutenants, they secure accommodations in the inn or settlement closest to your Bastion. Lieutenants are hirelings, not Bastion Defenders; however, if your Bastion is attacked (see "Bastion Events" at the end of this chapter), each lieutenant housed in your Bastion reduces by 1 the number of dice you roll to determine how many Bastion Defenders are lost in the attack. The War Room contains war memorabilia plus a large table surrounded by enough chairs for you and your lieutenants. Recruit Options. When you issue the Recruit order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Recruit: Lieutenant. You gain one new lieutenant. You can have up to ten lieutenants at any time. Assign names and personalities to them as you see fit. Recruit: Soldiers. You commission one or more of your lieutenants to assemble a small army. Each lieutenant can muster one hundred Guards (see the Monster Manual) in 7 days to fight for your cause. Reduce that number to twenty if you want them to be mounted on Riding Horses (see the Monster Manual). It costs you 1 GP per day to feed each guard and each horse in your army. Wher- ever the army goes, it must be led by you or at least one of your lieutenants, or else it disbands immediately. The army also disbands if it goes 1 day without being fed. Otherwise, the army re- mains until it is destroyed or you command it to disband. You can't issue this Recruit order again until your current army disbands or is destroyed. WORKSHOP Level 5 Bastion Facility Prerequisite: None Space: Roomy Hirelings: 3 Order: Craft This Workshop is a creative space where useful items can be crafted. Artisan's Tools. The Workshop comes equipped with six different kinds of Artisans Tools, chosen from the following list: Painter's Tools Potter's Tools Tinker's Tools Weaver's Tools Woodcarver's Tools Carpenter's Tools Cobbler's Tools Glassblower's Tools Jeweler's Tools Leatherworker's Tools Mason's Tools # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS 35 Craft Options. When you issue the Craft order to this facility, choose one of the following options: Craft: Adventuring Gear. The facility's hirelings craft anything that can be made with the tools you chose when you added the Workshop to your Bastion (see above), using the rules in the Player's Handbook. Craft: Magic Item (Implement). If you are level 9+, you can commission the facility's hirelings to craft a Common or an Uncommon magic item chosen by you from the Implements tables in chapter 7. The facility has the tool required to craft the item, and the hirelings have proficiency with that tool as well as proficiency in the Arcana skill. See the "Crafting Magic Items" section in chapter 7 for the time and money that must be spent to craft the item. If the item allows its user to cast any spells from it, you must craft the item yourself (the facility's hirelings can assist), and you must have all those spells prepared every day you spend crafting the item. Source of Inspiration. After spending an entire Short Rest in your Workshop, you gain Heroic Inspiration. You can't gain this benefit again until you finish a Long Rest. Enlarging the Facility. You can enlarge your Work- shop to a Vast facility by spending 2,000 GP. If you do so, the Workshop gains two additional hirelings and three additional Artisan's Tools (chosen from the list above). # Bastion Events Immediately after a character issues the Maintain order to their Bastion, the DM rolls once on the Bas- tion Events table to determine what event, if any, befalls the Bastion before the next Bastion Turn. If an event occurs, the DM reads the event aloud to the player whose character controls that Bastion. (All the events are described in the sections follow- ing the table.) The event is resolved immediately, with the player and DM working together to expand story details as needed. If multiple characters issue the Maintain order on the same Bastion turn, roll once on the table for each of them, resolving each event separately even if the Bastions are combined. Bastion events occur only when a Bastion is oper- ating under the Maintain order, which often means that the Bastion's owner isn't present in the Bastion at the time. That means these events can be opportunities for the player to take on the role of the Bas- tion's hirelings and roleplay their reactions to these events. The DM can even turn a Bastion event into a cutscene where each player takes on the role of one of the Bastion's hirelings (under the guidance of the player whose character owns the Bastion). # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS BasTION EVENTS 14100 Event 01-50 All Is Well 51-55 Attack 56-58 Criminal Hireling 59-63 Extraordinary Opportunity 64-72 Friendly Visitors 73-76 Guest 77-79 Lost Hirelings 80-83 Magical Discovery 84-91 Refugees 92-98 Request for Aid 99-00 Treasure # Event Descriptions The events from the Bastion Events table are detailed here in alphabetical order. Aut Is WELL Nothing significant happens. Roll on the following table, fleshing out the details as you see fit. 1d8 Details 1 Accident reports are way down. The leak in the roof has been fixed. No vermin infestations to report. You-Know-Who lost their spectacles again. One of your hirelings adopted a stray dog. You received a lovely letter from a friend. sa Ow fF WwW NH Some practical joker has been putting rotten eggs in people's boots. 8 Someone thought they saw a ghost. ATTACK A hostile force attacks your Bastion but is defeated. Roll 6d6; for each die that rolls a 1, one Bastion Defender dies. Remove these Bastion Defenders from your Bastion's roster. If the Bastion has zero Bastion Defenders, one of the Bastion's special facil- ities (determined randomly) is damaged and forced to shut down. A special facility that shuts down can't be used on your next Bastion turn, after which it is repaired and made operational again at no cost to you. # Criminal Hireling One of your Bastion's hirelings has a criminal past that comes to light when officials or bounty hunters visit your Bastion with a warrant for the hireling's arrest. You can retain the hireling by paying a bribe of 1d6 x 100 GP. Otherwise, the hireling is arrested and taken away. If this loss leaves one of your fa- cilities without any hirelings, that facility can't be used on your next Bastion turn. The hireling is then replaced at no cost to you. EXTRAORDINARY OPPORTUNITY Your Bastion is given the opportunity to host an important festival or celebration, fund the research of a powerful spellcaster, or appease a domineering noble. Work with the DM to determine the details. If you seize the opportunity, you must pay 500 GP to cover costs. In return, your Bastion gains a sudden influx of recognition or attention, prompt- ing the DM to roll again on the Bastion Events table (rerolling this result if it comes up again). If you decline the opportunity, you don't pay the money and nothing else happens. # Friendly Visitors Friendly visitors come to your Bastion, seeking to use one of your special facilities. They offer 1d6 « 100 GP for the brief use of that facility. For exam- ple, a knight might want your Smithy to replace a horseshoe or repair a damaged weapon or suit of armor, or sages might need your Arcane Study to help them settle a dispute. Their use of the facility doesn't interrupt any orders you've issued to it.: PE nt, ae,. ¢? Aan J i ay GUEST A Friendly guest comes to stay at your Bastion. De- termine the guest by rolling on the following table, and work with your DM to flesh out the details. 1d4 Guest 1 The guest is an individual of great renown who stays for 7 days. At the end of their stay, the guest gives you a letter of recommendation (see "Marks of Prestige" in chapter 3). 2 The guest requests sanctuary while avoiding persecution for their beliefs or crimes. They depart 7 days later, but not before offering you a gift of 1d6 x 100 GP. 3 The guest is a mercenary, giving you one ad- ditional Bastion Defender. The guest doesn't require a facility to house them, and they stay until you send them away or they're killed. 4 The guest is a Friendly monster, such as a brass dragon or a treant. If your Bastion is attacked while this monster is your guest, it defends your Bastion, and you lose no Bastion Defenders. The monster leaves after it defends your Bastion once or when you send it away. CHAPTER8\|BASTIONS 9351 at --- \_ # Bastion Tracker Players can use the Bastion Tracker sheet as a record of the facilities and other characteristics of their Bastions. Encourage your players to list their hirelings on this sheet and develop them more fully as NPCs on separate sheets (perhaps using the NPC Tracker in chapter 3). Similarly, the Bas- tion Tracker provides space to indicate the space of each special facility, but encourage players to draw maps of their Bastions (see "Bastion Map" earlier in this chapter). --- \| at Lost HIRELINGS One of your Bastion's special facilities (determined randomly) loses its hirelings. The cause of their departure is up to you. The facility can't be used on your next Bastion turn, but the hirelings are re- placed at no cost to you at that point. # Magical Discovery Your hirelings discover or accidentally create an Uncommon magic item of your choice at no cost to you. The magic item must be a Potion or Scroll. REFUGEES A group of 2d4 refugees fleeing from a monster attack, a natural disaster, or some other calamity seeks refuge in your Bastion. If your Bastion lacks a basic facility large enough to house them, the refugees camp right outside the Bastion. The refugees offer you 1d6 « 100 GP as payment for your hospi- tality and protection. They stay until you find them anew home or a hostile force attacks your Bastion. # Request For Aid Your Bastion is called on to help a local leader. Perhaps there's a search on for a missing person, or brigands are plaguing the area. If you help, you must dispatch one or more Bastion Defenders. Roll 1d6 for each Bastion Defender you send. If the total is 10 or higher, the problem is solved and you earn a reward of Id6 = 100 GP. If the total is less than 10, the problem is still solved, but the reward is halved and one of your Bastion Defenders is killed. Remove that Bastion Defender from your Bastion's roster. TREASURE Your Bastion acquires an art object or a magic item determined by rolling on the table below and then rolling on the specified table in chapter 7. How the Bastion acquires this treasure is up to you. It might represent an inheritance, a gift from a guest or an admirer, a theft, or a fortunate discovery. If you're in the Bastion, you can claim the treasure immedi- ately; otherwise, it is placed in storage until you can claim it. # CHAPTER \| BASTIONS ad spies we 1d100 Treasure 01-40 Roll on the 25 GP Art Objects table. 41-63 Roll on the 250 GP Art Objects table. 64-73 Roll on the 750 GP Art Objects table. 74-75 Roll on the 2,500 GP Art Objects table. 76-90 Roll on a Common Magic Items table of your choice (Arcana, Armaments, Imple- ments, or Relics). 91-98 Roll on an Uncommon Magic Items table of your choice (Arcana, Armaments, Imple- ments, or Relics). 99-00 Roll on a Rare Magic Items table of your choice (Arcana, Armaments, Implements, or Relics). # Fall Of A Bastion A player character can lose their Bastion in the fol- lowing ways: Divestiture. A character can give up their Bastion anytime, releasing the Bastion's hirelings and abandoning the location. The divested Bastion is quickly vacated, is eventually looted, and might even be burned to the ground. Neglect. If a character issues no orders to their Bastion for a number of consecutive Bastion turns equal to the character's level (typically because the character is dead or otherwise out of commis- sion), the hirelings abandon the Bastion and the site is eventually looted. If the character returns later, they can start a new Bastion, perhaps building it amid the ruins of the old one. Ruination. Drawing the Ruin card from the Deck of Many Things (as described in chapter 7) instantly deprives a character of their Bastion. When such an event occurs, the player can decide what terri- ble fate befalls the Bastion. The Bastion might be sacked by enemies or destroyed by an earthquake, for example. Regardless of how the Bastion falls, the player can work with the DM to establish a new Bastion and determine how it comes into being. Use the Special Facility Acquisition table to determine how many special facilities come with it. The new Bastion also starts with two basic facilities (one Cramped and one Roomy) of the player's choice. (, BASTION TRACKER BASTION'S NAME: CHARACTER'S NAME: LEVEL: # Basic Facilities BASTION DEFENDERS: SPECIAL FACILITY: SPECIAL FACILITY: SPACE: SPACE: ORDER: ORDER: HIRELINGS: HIRELINGS: NOTES NOTES oo 2? \| SPECIAL FACILITY: SPECIAL FACILITY: e 4 £ SPACE: SPACE: Ss ORDER: ORDER: ts HIRELINGS: HIRELINGS: 4 NOTES NOTES SPECIAL FACILITY: SPECIAL FACILITY: SPACE: SPACE: ORDER: ORDER: HIRELINGS: HIRELINGS: a) NOTES NOTES # Appendix A # Lore Glossary This appendix provides brief descriptions for many of the D&D game's most famous heroes, villains, creatures, locations, and materials. (If something isn't listed here, check the index to see whether it's covered elsewhere in the book.) The entries are pre- sented in alphabetical order. Terms in bold have their own entries in this appendix. ACERERAK Acererak (ah-SAIR-er-rack) is a powerful lich who travels between worlds and takes pleasure in de- vouring the souls of adventurers, whom he lures into trap-ridden dungeons to suffer horrible deaths. The most famous of such dungeons is the Tomb of Horrors, hidden in the Vast Swamp in the Grey- hawk setting (see "Greyhawk Gazetteer" in chapter 5); another lies under the lost city of Omu in the jungles of Chult in the Forgotten Realms setting (described in the adventure Tomb of Annihilation). ADAMANTINE Adamantine is one of the hardest substances in exis- tence, a dark metal found in meteorites and extraor- dinary mineral veins. (See the Adamantine Armor and Adamantine Weapon magic items in chapter 7.) # Alustriel Silverhand Alustriel (ah-LOOSE-tree-ell) Silverhand is the second of seven daughters of Mystra, a deity of magic in the Forgotten Realms setting. (Laeral Silverhand is Alustriel's younger sister.) She ruled the city of Silverymoon for centuries but stepped down from that position a little over a century ago to promote goodness and compassion in the multiverse. She has befriended adventurers such as Drizzt Do'Urden and worked alongside the Harpers in pursuit of these aims. ASHARDALON The terrible red dragon Ashardalon (ah-SHAR-duh- lawn) is legendary across the multiverse for his rampages, which turned lush grasslands into ashen plains and caused mighty citadels to be swallowed into the earth. As he grew aware of worlds be- yond his home, he recruited a balor demon named Ammet, the Eater of Souls, to help him extend his reach and increase his power. When an adventurer dealt a mortal blow to Ashardalon's heart, the dragon replaced the injured organ with the balor. Ashardalon's features then took on a fiendish cast, APPENDIX A \| LORE GLOSSARY and his eyes now glow with demonic flame. A secre- tive cult of Ashardalon's followers and spawn serves him on the Material Plane, furthering the dragon's schemes to attain godhood.