# Nearby Attractions North of the city are the Cairn Hills, which are known to have tombs and dungeons hidden among them. Nearby are a forest, a swamp, and a desert. The monsters that haunt these areas tend to be weak---perfect for testing the mettle of low-level adventurers. # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK: PORT IN THE STORM The city provides a place to rest, heal, acquire in- formation, and procure magic items. Adventurers looking to visit distant lands can book passage on ships docked at the wharf. TRADE Hus Adventurers can buy gear and sell their hard-won loot in the city's shops and markets. How To UsE THE City A bustling city like Greyhawk can serve the follow- ing important functions in a campaign. # Background Connections Use the backgrounds of the characters to connect them to people and places in the city. These con- nections help the players feel like Greyhawk is their characters' home---or will quickly become their new home. A character who was born and raised in Greyhawk might have known one of the city's prominent figures for many years, while someone who has just arrived in the city might have a mutual friend with that connection or might carry a letter of introduction recommending them to that per- son. (Each location detailed in the "City Locations" section includes potential connections for two char- acter backgrounds.) # City Activities Greyhawk is an ideal place for activities that sup- port adventuring. There's endless opportunity for social interaction in such a bustling place, as well as places where characters can rest and recuperate between adventures, acquire new adventuring gear, and spend their gold. # Home Base Asa home base for characters, Greyhawk can serve as a place to live, train, and recuperate between adventures. As described under "Getting Players Invested" in this chapter, Greyhawk offers a host of potential friends, rivals, villains, and resources, Use the people and locations mentioned in this chapter as a starting point for fleshing out characters' con- nections to the city, and work with your players to develop those connections. Choose one neighbor- hood of the city (see "City Neighborhoods" below) as a focus for the characters and their activities. # Urban Adventures A city isn't just a place to spend time between ad- ventures---plenty of adventures happen within the city walls. From wererats in the sewers to schem- ing bureaucrats in the halls of power, dangers lurk around every corner. Tue Free City of Greynawk RISES up BENMINO THE TEEMING ¢ iTy OOCKS Beck City OVERVIEW The city is yours to make your own. A few im- portant features and locations are described in the sections that follow, but otherwise flesh out the city as you and your players see fit. City GOVERNMENT The Free City of Greyhawk is ruled by a council called the Directing Oligarchy, made up of six- teen coequal rulers. This council elects its chief officer, the lord mayor---a position currently held by a human Spy Master (Lawful Neutral) named Nerof Gasgol. The other directors include the captain-general and constable of the City Watch, several guild masters, priests of Boccob and Rao, the inspector of taxes, and a few influential magic-users with ties to politically active secret societies. Sev- eral of these directors represent criminal or unsa- vory interests, including Nerof Gasgol himself, who achieved his position and wealth as the owner of a notorious gambling den. City WATCH The City Watch is a standing garrison of some eight hundred Guards and Veteran Warriors. Bolstering these defenders are Mages from the city's Guild of Wizardry, as well as Priests from local temples. The captain-general and constable of the City Watch are stationed at the Grand Citadel (see "City Locations"). Crtry WALLS A 30-foot-high stone wall winds like a snake around the city. Two other walls, identical in height to the outer wall, separate the city into its three great sections. Access to the wall tops can be gained via lifts in each gatehouse. In addition, along the inside base of the outer wall are secret compartments at 300-foot intervals, each one containing a 30-foot- tall wooden ladder. All members of the City Watch know the locations of these secret ladders, which, in an emergency, can be pulled out and used by city defenders to quickly reach the parapets. The walls are patrolled regularly. During daytime, the typical patrol is one sentry (a Guard) placed every 300 feet along the top of the wall. At night, the guard patrol is quadrupled, with two sentries posted together every 150 feet along the wall. Also at night, torches light the wall top at 150-foot inter- vals between the guards so each sentry station is 75 feet from a torch in each direction. City GATES Each city gate consists of a pair of iron-reinforced wooden doors that can be barred from the inside. These heavy doors are backed by a massive portcul- lis of iron bars. A very small child might be able to squeeze between the bars, but not a youth or even ee an adult halfling. The city's portcullises are usually left open even when the gates are closed. Each gate is contained within a small gatehouse flanked by a pair of towers. The tower tops and con- necting blockhouse are equipped with arrow slits and holes for pouring boiling oil straight down onto invaders. Each gatehouse tower connects to the city through a door in its base and to the wall top by a door in its side. The towers contain three platforms, beginning at the top of the wall and extending upward. Each of these can shelter and provide a firing platform for up to forty archers. Three of the city's gates typically remain open throughout the day and night: the Highway Gate (the grand entrance to the city), the Cargo Gate (used primarily by traders and merchants), and the Garden Gate (one of the city's two inner gates). The remaining gates are closed from dusk until dawn, and a visitor must produce a written message from the lord mayor of Greyhawk, the captain-general of the City Watch, or a head of state to be allowed through. In the latter case, the guards ensure the traveler is harmless before opening the gates. Those passing through open gates aren't asked to explain their business, nor are they detained or turned back unless they are recognized as known fugitives. Wagons and carts might get searched if they trigger the guards' suspicions, but most ve- hicles are waved through without inspection. The guards keep a daily roster of who and what pass through their gates. CRIME The Free City of Greyhawk is home to many thieves, vandals, charlatans, and hooligans. Crimes are divided into three categories. Petty Crime. Public unarmed brawling, pickpock- eting, vandalism, and other crimes that cause up to 50 GP in property damage are petty crimes. The perpetrator pays a fine of 2410 GP or works to pro- vide restitution. Minor Crime. The category of minor crimes in- cludes armed assault (defined as any nonfatal attack made with a weapon or damaging spell) and prop- erty crimes that cause between 50 and 250 GP in damages. The perpetrator must pay a fine of at least 100 GP and is sentenced to 1d6 years in prison. Major Crime. Crimes more severe than those de- scribed above---including murder, bribery or imper- sonation of a city official, and magical coercion---are major crimes. The criminal faces 2d10 years of imprisonment, the death penalty, or permanent ex- ile. A city magistrate decides which punishment is appropriate. # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK: 151 wn a ee ee RELIGION The city has temples and shrines dedicated to var- ious gods. Religious practices that are certifiably evil aren't tolerated, however. When an evil sect is discovered in the city, its wealth is confiscated, its leaders are put to death, and all other members are banished from the city for life. See the "Gods of Greyhawk" table for many deities worshiped by the inhabitants of the Free City. City NEIGHBORHOODS The Free City of Greyhawk is split into three main sections by two internal walls running west to east. The northern section is home to the High Quarter and the Garden Quarter, where the wealthiest folk of the city reside. The central section is home to the River Quarter, Clerkburg, the Artisans' Quarter, and the Foreign Quarter. The southern portion, known as the Old City, includes the poorer and rowdier neighborhoods of the Slum Quarter and the Thieves' Quarter. Brief descriptions of the city's neighborhoods are presented below: Artisans' Quarter. The Artisans' Quarter is built around a large marketplace. The finest artisans live and work here, and the city's trade guilds are headquartered here. Clerkburg. Clerkburg is the university district of Greyhawk, with dozens of schools and colleges and the businesses that support them. Temples line the appropriately named Street of Temples in the southeast corner of the district. Foreign Quarter. The Foreign Quarter is among the most multicultural districts of the city, and it boasts fine apartments and restaurants. Garden Quarter. The Garden Quarter is an extrav- agant neighborhood similar to the High Quarter, but the mansions aren't quite as ornate, the es- tates aren't as large, and it's not as gaudy. High Quarter. Palaces, temples, mansions, and gardens fill the posh High Quarter. Extravagant architecture and wide-open spaces define this quarter. River Quarter. The River Quarter encompasses taverns and entertainment venues, as well as the wharves along the Selintan River outside the city wall. Because it's a hub of trade, it's the most di- verse, multicultural part of the city. Slum Quarter. The Slum Quarter is the poorest, most desperate region within Greyhawk's walls, full of crime-ridden apartments. Thieves' Quarter. The buildings of the Thieves' Quarter are slightly less run down than their Slum Quarter equivalents, and its people are mar- ginally better off. City LOCATIONS The locations detailed here can serve as a good starting point for your campaign. Use them as ex- amples when fleshing out new locations for your game. BLACK DRAGON INN This three-story, slightly run-down inn is situated in the heart of the city. A sign carved to resemble the grinning visage of a black dragon hangs over the front door. A stable is located behind the inn. The Black Dragon Inn in Clerkburg has good food and affordable rooms. The inn's stable can hold up to a dozen steeds. The inn's proprietor is Miklos Dare, a human Vet- eran Warrior (Chaotic Good) who loves to recount his heroic exploits in the Battle of Emridy Mead- Ows seven years ago, when warriors from across the Central Flanaess united to drive the forces of wickedness from the Temple of Elemental Evil (see "Central Flanaess" in this chapter). A red-bearded bear of a man with a prosthetic leg, Miklos is affable and proud. His friendly rivalry with Olaf and Sivan, the proprietors of the Silver Dragon Inn just up the street, is the talk of the city. Olaf and Sivan recently hired a mage to make Miklos's black dragon sign drool acid, much to the chagrin of visitors entering and leaving the Black Dragon. Miklos is itching to pull a similar prank of his own. Character Backgrounds. An adventurer with the Soldier background might have a tie to Miklos, per- haps having fought alongside him at the Battle of Emridy Meadows. A character with the Wayfarer background might know Miklos as a generous man who gives away food and sometimes even lodging to people in need. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the Black Dragon Inn for one of the following reasons: Eavesdropper's Paradise. Many clandestine meet- ings occur at the Black Dragon. Adventurers eavesdropping on private conversations might overhear tantalizing rumors or uncover valuable information. Information Source. If the adventurers let Miklos tell stories of his past exploits or agree to help him play a prank on his rivals, he can steer them to- ward new adventure opportunities. He's also quite familiar with the nature of Elemental Evil. Place to Stay. The Black Dragon is close to the city's central marketplace. A traveler can sleep in a common room for 2 SP per night or secure a pri- vate room for 5 SP per night. A luxury suite costs 2 GP per night. a ae St a am ae pay Si. ae 4 Se ' Citing a fics: See asa ees 2 # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK 153 ye # Grand Citadel A many-towered fortress looms above all quar- ters of the city from its position atop a low rise. Its outer walls, darkened by soot and smoke, could use a good scrubbing. The grand edifice at the northern end of the High Quarter, simply called "the Citadel" by the city's inhabitants, contains barracks for the City Watch, the offices of the captain-general, the city's trea- sury, and a large store of armaments for the emer- gency citizen militia. The Citadel also contains a prison where the city's most hardened criminals are incarcerated. The captain-general of the City Watch is Sental Nurey, a tall, human Veteran Warrior (Neutral Good) with thinning blond hair and a mustache. Sental is usually incorruptible, but he is under great stress. The rulers of Stoink, a fortified town in the Bandit Kingdoms, have captured Sental's brother Sarek and are forcing the captain-general to provide ie information about Greyhawk's defenses and local politicians. Sental gives this information to a human Spy (Chaotic Evil) who stays at the Black Dragon Inn under the false name Skanda Drond. Sental is unaware that the bandit lords of Stoink are pawns of luz, whose dreams of conquest extend to the Free City of Greyhawk and far beyond. The city's constable---who serves as second-in- command to the captain-general, manager to the members of the watch, and a member of the Di- recting Oligarchy---is a compassionate Priest of Pelor named Derider Fanshen (Neutral Good). Her kindness and talent for healing make her well loved among the watch, and as a former adventurer, she is sympathetic to adventurers' needs. She's unaware of Sental's compromised position. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Criminal or Guard background might have a con- nection to the Grand Citadel involving a past run-in with the law or past service on the watch. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might be drawn to the Grand Citadel for one of the following reasons: Appointment. The adventurers have an appoint- ment to speak with Sental Nurev, perhaps because they need help freeing a companion who was arrested for a crime or because they wish to report a threat to the city. Break-In or Breakout. The adventurers are hired to break into the Citadel's treasury vault or break someone out of the Citadel's prison. Imprisonment. The adventurers are imprisoned in the Citadel for some heinous crime. Ahr a \* y it f - 4 ts.. # Great Library The front of this building is a grand sweep of granite walls and tall columns. A wide ramp leads to a pair of massive doors flanked by stonecarved dragons. Inside, it's cool and musty. Weapons and armor aren't permitted in the Great Library. If anyone wearing armor or carrying a vis- ible weapon tries to enter the library, or if a thief is spotted trying to leave the library with one or more stolen books, the stone-carved bronze dragons flanking the entrance animate and attack. These statues are Stone Golems. Abra Saghast, a crusty and irascible dragonborn sage, serves as the head librarian. Abra, an Arch- mage (Chaotic Good), has bright-green eyes, and her bronze scales are tinged with aquamarine blue. She typically wears a patchwork robe. Abra sits behind a high desk in the main hall. Six open archways lead from the main hall to wings where the bulk of the library's books are shelved, free for visitors to peruse (but not remove from the library). The library has several sages and scribes under contract to write books, mostly detailing current affairs in the city. An iron door leads to a hallway behind the head librarian's desk. Three scribes (Mages) labor here and act as sentries, for next to their desks are three locked, iron doors to the library's vaults. Arcane Lock spells seal these doors, beyond which are re- positories for the library's most valuable or scandal- ous works. Next to each scribe's desk is a pull cord hanging through a hole in the ceiling. A tug on any one of these cords releases a homing pigeon from a loft above the library. It takes the bird 1 minute to find and alert an Archmage, who teleports to the main hall of the library to investigate. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Sage or Scribe background might have a connection to the Great Library and its proprietor. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the Great Library for one of the following reasons: Research. Adventurers searching for a specific book or more information about a specific topic might find what they're looking for in the library. Spellbooks. The adventurers might need to purloin one of the many spellbooks kept in the library, ne- cessitating a carefully planned heist. Spell Scrolls. Adventurers can commission the scribes to create a Spell Scroll that bears a Wizard spell of level 5 or lower. See the Player's Handbook for the time required to craft a scroll; the scribes charge double the cost shown there. HicH TOWER INN Conveniently located near the Selintan River, this inviting inn is distinguished by its tall tower, which is pointed at the top like the hat of an eccentric Wizard. The clientele is notably wealthy, but the inn itself isn't at all ostentatious. 4 The High Tower Inn's human proprietor, Erlynn Goodfellow, is a soft-spoken, middle-aged, pot- bellied Mage (Lawful Good) with gray hair, bright- blue eyes, and platinum-rimmed spectacles. She dabbled in adventuring before realizing she had little taste for danger and her life's calling might in- volve more sedentary pursuits. Few guests know of Erlynn's magical abilities, as she rarely casts spells in front of strangers. The High Tower, located in the Garden Quarter, is a favorite haunt for some of the city's most famous wizards, including Otto and Jallarzi. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Merchant or Noble background might have a con- nection to the High Tower Inn, which caters to people of means. THe Sitver DRAGON INN J5 A LIVELY HUB OF ACTIVITY IN GREVYHAWK'S FOREIGN QuaRTER. fh a -, Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the High Tower for one of the following reasons: Information Source. Erlynn knows all the local rumors. If she trusts the adventurers, Erlynn can direct them to an NPC who needs their services. Place to Stay. The adventurers need a place to stay, and the High Tower boasts comfortable quar- ters, ample supplies of wine and ale, and spicy food. The establishment has six private sleeping chambers, each of which rents for 3 GP per night. Three of these guest rooms are in the tower, each one on its own floor. Spellicaster. The adventurers might have business with a powerful spellcaster staying at the inn. # Silver Dragon Inn This grandiose, multistory inn sports a wooden sign bearing the words "Silver Dragon Inn" in fancy silver script, the S shaped like a silver drag- on. A more modest sign next to the front door reads, "No metal armor. Shields and weapons must be checked at the door." 4 | t | | | The grand Silver Dragon Inn, located in the For- eign Quarter, is often the first place sought by new # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK 155 arrivals to the city. The prices are average, but the food servings are huge. The inn's menu includes spicy bean dishes, seafood delicacies of the Wild Coast, and rice and vegetable entrées. Weapons larger than daggers must be checked at the door, together with shields. Customers wearing metal armor aren't admitted. Two bouncers (Neu- tral Tough Bosses) stand at the door, politely en- forcing the rule. The inn's married human proprietors, Olaf Al- Azul (Chaotic Good Veteran Warrior) and Sivan Al-Azul (Chaotic Neutral Assassin), speak multiple languages and use humor to raise spirits and diffuse tensions. Olaf can almost always break up a fight before it starts, generally with a round of drinks for the instigators. Sivan is quiet and introspective, but he always keeps a hilarious joke or cutting remark at the ready. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Artisan or Entertainer background might do busi- ness with the Silver Dragon Inn. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the Sil- ver Dragon for one of the following reasons: Meeting with Foreign Dignitaries. Foreign dig- nitaries come here to enjoy the Silver Dragon's food and accommodations. Characters who plan to visit distant lands might connect with these esteemed visitors. Place to Stay. The Silver Dragon is centrally lo- cated in the city and has twenty-four guest rooms on the upper floors. A traveler can sleep in a com- mon room for 1 SP per night, a private room for 3 SP per night, or a luxury suite for 1 GP per night. Security. The Silver Dragon Inn prides itself on being a safe stop for visitors. Its proprietors and bouncers are trained to deal with trouble without the support of the City Watch. # Temple Of The Far Horizon Hidden among the city's grander temples is a quiet, modest house of worship with clay-tiled rooftops, a corner bell tower, and well-tended vegetable gardens. Sick and hungry folk gather in short lines outside as they wait for priests to attend to their needs. Situated in the Garden Quarter, this temple is dedi- cated to Fharlanghn, a god favored by travelers and mercenaries. The Priests who staff the temple offer nourishment, rest, and healing to those in need, day and night. Several small rooms are maintained for guests, and simple, hot meals are free to all visitors. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Guide or Sailor background might have a connec- tion to the temple, which offers help to travelers. # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK ---. i mail Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the tem- ple for one of the following reasons: Adventurers Wanted. The priests keep tabs on threats in the region around the city. They're pay- ing close attention to rumors of dragon activity in the nearby Cairn Hills, and they're looking to hire adventurers to investigate these rumors. Healing. Adventurers can purchase Potions of Heal- ing for 50 GP each, and the temple's priests have 1d4 such potions in stock on any given day. The priests also have Cure Wounds and Lesser Resto- ration spells prepared and customarily cast them for free. For more powerful magic, such as Greater Restoration and Raise Dead spells, the priests direct the adventurers to the Temple of the Radiant Sun. Safe Travels. By making a small donation to the temple, adventurers increase the likelihood of safe travel to their next destination. Teleportation Circle. Though it isn't the only per- manent teleportation circle in the city, the circle within the Temple of the Far Horizon is the easiest to access. The priests allow free access to the teleportation circle in either direction. For 2,000 GP, the chief priest will cast the Teleportation Circle spell to open a connection to another permanent circle on the Material Plane. # Temple Of The Radiant Sun This copper-roofed temple has a gold-inlaid sym- bol of the sun above its double-door entrance. During the day, sunlight shines through high win- dows to illuminate the temple's interior, which is adorned with golden draperies. This temple, dedicated to serving the god Pelor in the heart of the Garden Quarter, opens at dawn and closes at dusk. In a sanctuary in the heart of the temple, Priests conduct daily morning rites, as well as all-day observances every Godsday. Sarana, the temple's Archpriest (Neutral Good), is a middle-aged, human woman wearing a sun-shaped headdress and yellow-and-gold robes. She is never seen in public without her Staff of Healing. Sarana has straw-colored hair, green eyes, and a forgiving nature. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Acolyte background might have served in the Tem- ple of the Radiant Sun, while those with the Farmer background might seek it out as a place for blessing. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit the tem- ple for one of the following reasons: Healing. The temple sells Spell Scrolls of Greater Res- toration for 3,200 GP apiece and Spell Scrolls of Re- move Curse for 300 GP apiece, and the priests have ta 1d5 copies of each scroll in stock on any given day. The priests also have Cure Wounds and Lesser Res- toration spells prepared, which they customarily cast for free. Raise Dead. Archpriest Sarana is one of a handful of people in the Free City of Greyhawk who can cast the Raise Dead spell, but she needs the requi- site 500 GP diamond to do so. Sarana can recom- mend a jeweler who sells diamonds of sufficient value. Before agreeing to cast the spell, Sarana casts Zone of Truth and asks questions about the deceased individual to make sure she's not returning to life someone who should stay dead. Service to the Greater Good. The temple might call upon the adventurers to perform good acts in the city or abroad. Sarana is particularly vigilant about the threat of Elemental Evil, since she was involved in the battle at the Temple of Elemental Evil seven years ago. In exchange for their service, the characters and their companions are entitled to a SO percent discount on goods purchased at the temple. # Unearthed Arcana | This quaint, two-story shop has a sign depicting a white-bearded human Wizard holding a staf | that has a copper ball affixed to its tip. Displayed | in the store's window box are various potions, \| scrolls, wands, and wondrous oddities. Magic items are bought and sold in Unearthed Ar- cana, a quaint shop in Clerkburg. Magical wards render the store's windows and doors shatterproof, and no one can use magic to enter or leave the shop without the consent of its proprietor, Morley, whose quarters take up the second floor. Morley is an Adult Copper Dragon (Chaotic Good) who spends his days shape-shifted into a talkative, alert, white-bearded human mage wearing a pointed hat, frayed robes, and pointed slippers. Only a few people in the city---including the es- teemed local members of the Circle of Eight, Jallarzi Sallavarian and Otto---know Morley's true form. Morley is one of the city's secret weapons, ready to repel invaders or break a siege should the need arise. The dragon has a soft spot for adventurers who risk their lives for good causes. He occasionally loans magic items free of charge to valorous heroes who can't afford them, on the condition that the items be returned to him as soon as they're no lon- ger needed. Character Backgrounds. Adventurers with the Charlatan or Hermit background might have a con- nection to Unearthed Arcana, as Morley has a vari- ety of unusual interests. Reasons to Visit. Adventurers might visit Un- earthed Arcana for one of the following reasons: Buying and Selling Magic Items. Morley buys and sells magic items at standard prices (see chapter 7). Although he keeps a few magic items in the shop to catch the eye, most of his inventory is stored in extradimensional vaults only he can ac- cess. The shop sells many Common, Uncommon, and Rare magic items---mainly potions, rings, rods, staffs, wands, and wondrous items. Morley has access to a few Very Rare and Legendary magic items as well. Free Loan. A benefactor arranges for Morley to loan the characters a magic item to help them complete a quest. Before giving them the item, Morley asks they return it in pristine condition. Magic Item Identification. Morley can cast the Identify spell at will. He charges 50 GP for each casting of the spell. # CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK 157 ) # City Of Greyhawk 4 ws nn eZ oe at Se \| | own} (subterranean) ---, Oars: e ee ea BO, s) AND ENVIRONS \| CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK "s =, tes F ee. Ni = P '© i", met ee BEYOND THE City WALLS The City of Greyhawk and Environs map shows the lands around the Free City of Greyhawk. Locations on the map are presented below as places where adventures can happen: Blackfair Manor. Typical of several manor houses and keeps scattered across the Plain of Greyhawk, Blackfair Manor was founded by a distinguished cavalry commander. Its stable is the most famous source of fast, durable warhorses across the breadth of the Flanaess, drawing shrewd shoppers from Greyhawk and beyond. The manor house is surrounded by farms, extensive pastureland, and a small village with a mill, taverns, a smithy, and a saddlery. Blackstone. See "Mining Towns" below. Blackwall Keep. One of two new keeps built to keep an eye on the Mistmarsh, Blackwall Keep is a strong, stone tower with a horse corral sur- rounded by a wooden stockade. Soldiers from Greyhawk garrison the keep and venture out from it to patrol the northern edge of the swamp. Cairn Hills. Hidden among the hills north and east of the city are ancient tombs and half-buried ruins that attract adventurers, bandits, cultists of Ele- mental Evil, and monsters. Castle Greyhawk. Travelers who follow the Selin- tan River westward from the city come to a stone bridge. From there, they must travel several miles northeast to reach the ruins of Castle Greyhawk. Built by the archmage Zagig Yragerne and aban- doned with his demise, the ruins (and the many- leveled dungeon below) are a powerful draw to adventurers who seek wealth, glory, and magical might. All manner of marvels are said to fill the ruins, including numerous portals to other planes. Diamond Lake. See "Mining Towns" below. Elmshire. This sleepy town with a sizable halfling population lies on the shore of the Nyr Dyv. Fish- ing boats crowd the wharves. The townsfolk wel- come peaceful visitors---particularly adventurers who can help fend off monsters, bandits, and cults of Elemental Evil lurking in Cairn Hills. Ery Villages. The villages of High Ery and Erybend are populated largely by farmers who send most of their produce for sale in Greyhawk. The two villages are both dominated by two prominent families, the Fairheights and the Witherwinns. The families have a complicated history including abundant instances of feuding and intermarriage, as well as a catalog of lesser slights and favors. Ford Keep. A ferry crossing allows traffic from Greyhawk and regions to the south to cross the Selintan River at its first major bend. The lord mayor of Greyhawk built Ford Keep here to pro- tect the crossing from bandits. Gorge of the Selintan. Soaring cliffs flank the Selintan River for nearly ten miles. Spanning this gorge, 800 feet above the river, is a stone arch bridge sculpted to look like an extension of the natural bedrock. The bridge allows easy travel between Greyhawk and Grossettgrottell. As a defensive measure, the bridge's gnome architects hid an iron pin somewhere in the bridge; if this pin is removed, the entire structure collapses. Grossettgrottell. An industrious community of gnome miners and foragers lives in this network of hewn tunnels and natural caverns, The gnomes trade gemstones and rare fungi in exchange for help repelling monsters from the Underdark. Marsh Keep. Like Blackwall Keep, Marsh Keep is newly built and watches over the Mistmarsh. The Dwarfwalk road leads east from the tower to Greysmere, a quarrying town with a large popula- tion of dwarves. Mining Towns. Blackstone, Diamond Lake, and Steaming Springs are small mining towns gov- erned and protected by the Free City of Grey- hawk. The city frequently dispatches adventurers to quell threats to the towns' miners and mining operations, which of late includes agents of luz intent on destabilizing the city's economy. Mistmarsh. This vast swamp holds the half-sunken ruins of an ancient city that is now shrouded by fog and guarded by a family of black dragons. Will-o'-wisps lure prey to the ruins, where doom awaits. Peculiar Manor. Like other manors in the Plain of Greyhawk, Peculiar Manor was established bya now-forgotten hero of an ancient war. However, a few years ago it was purchased by retired adven- turers from Ekbir, Sanjarah and Chetna Mohsin. The Mohsins brew an extraordinary ale they call Old Peculiar, which lends its name to the manor. Steaming Springs. See "Mining Towns" above. Stone Bridge. A small garrison in the fort of Stone Bridge keeps careful watch over river traffic approaching Greyhawk. Stonefort. A garrison of soldiers from Greyhawk watches over the southern Nyr Dyv from the high battlements of Stonefort. The fort also guards a gravel quarry. Tokhel Castle. This blasted ruin stands on a rocky promontory above the Nyr Dyv. A dead magic zone (see "Environmental Effects" in chapter 3) encompasses most of the ruin, and monsters guard whatever secrets the ancient castle and its dungeons might hold. Two Ford. The small village of Two Ford relies on river trade to supply its inns, smithies, and mer- chants. Ore from the mining towns is also traded here, as it is easier to transport it by river than overland. nye jc CHAS TER 5 \| GREYHAWK --- \<p # Greyhawk Gazetteer The poster map in this book shows the entire region of the Flanaess, with the Free City of Greyhawk near the center. As characters venture beyond the confines of the city and its surrounding lands, you can use the map and the information on these pages to inspire your own adventures and world details. # The Big Picture To understand the Greyhawk of today (the year 576 in the Common Year), it is helpful to picture the Flanaess about 200 years ago. At that time, the Great Kingdom of Aerdy stretched from the Vast Swamp to the Rakers, and from the Solnor Ocean to the Yatil and Lortmil Mountains. Between the Lortmil Mountains and the Crystalmists was the Kingdom of Keoland, mimicking the Great King- dom in its imperialist approach. To the west of the mountains, the Baklunish nations---survivors of the Invoked Devastation---stood much as they do now. And to the north, nomadic peoples (the Chakyik, the Wegwiur, the rovers of the Hunting Lands) and the North Kingdoms were, as now, independent of the politics of the south. The contraction of the two southern realms over the last two centuries is the primary force that has shaped the modern Flanaess. First, the provinces of Perrenland, Veluna, and Furyondy---far from the overking's throne in Rauxes---declared their inde- pendence from the Great Kingdom. When Nyrond joined them (in 356 CY), the stage was set for the slow disintegration of the Great Kingdom and the ongoing rebellion that dominates the eastern part of the Flanaess to this day. The beginning of Aerdy's decline marked the high-water mark of Keoland's expansionist poli- cies, as it held sway from the Pomarj to the borders of Ket. Aided by Celene, rebels in the Ulek region strove to curb the kingdom's warlike ways, and the accession of King Tavish IV in 453 CY marked a dramatic shift in royal policy. The Yeomanry and the Ulek states were granted autonomy, the Gran March and Sterich became semi-independent while remaining loyal to the crown, and the diverse peoples of this region coexist in relative peace once again. With this big picture in mind, you can think of the Flanaess beyond the Free City of Greyhawk as five major regions, each with its own store of adventure possibilities waiting to be explored: Central Flanaess. Diverse peoples clash against Iuz and the forces of Elemental Evil. Eastern Flanaess. The remnants of the Great King- dom struggle to determine the fate of the lands in the overking's wicked clutches. |: is Northern Flanaess. In vast wilderness expanses populated by indigenous folk, one's mettle is tested by the environment and roving dragons. Old Keoland. The former provinces of Keoland contend against evil monsters from the western mountains, including dragons and giants. Western Flanaess. The Baklunish peoples and nations navigate complex political relationships. LivING History Greyhawk has a long history of ancient empires and more recent wars, but the only relevant details of this history are those that feature in your adventures. Highlight significant in-world details by revealing them in the course of your adventures. Use the following techniques to share lore with your players: Echoes of the Past. Features like a crater in the side of a mountain, a defaced statue in the town square, or a holiday celebrating a local hero provide concrete touchstones to past events. The characters might learn that a ruin they're exploring was destroyed in a catastrophic battle or natural disaster. Historical Records. Written historical details might appear anywhere in an adventure: glyphs on ancient dungeon walls, books in a library, files in a royal vault, or tapestries depicting key events. Use such set dressing to share import- ant details. Summarize what lengthy works say, and focus on the most plot-worthy parts. Scholarly Expertise. Characters who have profi- ciency in the Arcana, History, or Religion skill can be fonts of useful information. When it would be helpful for a group to know something about the setting, ask such characters to make an Intelligence check using the relevant skill, then share plot-relevant details if their roll war- rants it. Magical Footnotes. Spells such as Contact Other Plane, Legend Lore, and Speak with Dead allow characters to learn information while leaving you control of the particulars. Primary Sources. Personify the past through a tragic ghost, an otherworldly guardian, an ar- tificial intelligence, an ancient sage, or another long-lived individual. Such NPCs give you a way to share relevant information and respond to questions from the party. If the characters miss an important detail, this NPC can reinforce de- tails in a way books and recollected facts can't. Any one of these methods is useful for revealing a few details. You can combine them to share nu- anced histories and help players feel like they're digging into a rich and realistic history. \~s e 161 FA = \< > ta i. te\] \[puelsy + Wesjoj 2 R: a \< x )\<U12`\S`{=tex}2 M SHUOVE eos) mel am "a3 ee ae =\~ "sine Wey Ast) a oan IE ap cea haat = ees Got See H2Z JP. aeueyne. = x # Central Flanaess The rich soil and pleasant climate of the region be- tween the Nyr Dyv and the Yatil Mountains---com- bined with healthy trade relations between these realms and their neighbors to the east, south, and west---make this a strong and prosperous region.. BATTLE OF EMRIDY MEADOWS ' Seven years ago, knights and soldiers from Fury- ta ondy, the Archclericy of Veluna, the Viscounty of Verbobonc, and the elven kingdom of Celene formed an alliance to repel an evil horde that had gathered in the grassy fields south of the Velverdyva River. This clash of armies---arguably a the greatest seen in Eastern Oerik---was called the If Battle of Emridy Meadows. The forces of evil were \| ae smashed, and their remnants were driven back into z the dungeons under their stronghold, the Temple of 2 Elemental Evil. The forces of good, under the com-; mand of Prince Thrommel IV of Furyondy, besieged the temple, which fell in a fortnight. Only a few of, the temple's wicked leaders escaped, and it is sus- te pected that these individuals were responsible for ¢ the subsequent kidnapping of the prince. Prince Thrommel was engaged to marry Lady Jolene, a priest from a prominent noble family of CHAPTER \| GREYHAWK a >. >. ry a ' ' \* \| THE HOLY DAYS OF Rao are OCCASIONS FOR vc L PROCESSIONS # Ando Festivals In Veluna Veluna. Their marriage would have united Fury- ondy and Veluna as a single entity, with the canon of Veluna ruling in matters spiritual and the king of Furyondy ruling in matters temporal. This com- bined state, with its powerful elf allies in Celene, could wage a steady war against the evil plaguing Eastern Oerik. The prince's disappearance has stalled these plans. THE RISE OF Iuz luz is the offspring of the demon lord Graz'zt and a human archmage named Iggwilv. For ages, he ruled the lands from the Howling Hills to Lake Whyestil, naming his domain after himself. These lands are so despoiled and dangerous that the otherwise fierce nomads of the Hunting Lands and Wegwiur pass through the Cold Marshes rather than enter the merest edge of Iuz's realm. Iuz's evil reign was interrupted by a sixty-five- year imprisonment in the dungeon under Castle Greyhawk. During his absence, the Kingdom of Furyondy and its allies prospered, while the land of luz was overrun with evil bandits and monsters. luz's absence turned him into a legend and attracted a host of new followers, whose misplaced faith in- vested him with the power of a demigod. 4 i rf.