# CHAPTER\| COSMOLOGY 197 198 LIMBO Limbo is a plane of pure chaos, a roiling soup of impermanent matter and energy. Stone melts into water that freezes into metal, then turns into dia- mond that burns up into smoke that becomes snow, and on and on in an endless, unpredictable process of change. Fragments of more ordinary land- scapes---bits of forest, meadow, ruined castles, and even burbling streams---drift through the disorder, The whole plane is a nightmarish riot. Limbo has no gravity, so creatures visiting the plane float in place. A creature can move up to its Speed in any direction by merely thinking of the desired direction of travel. Limbo has no layers---or if it does, the layers continually merge and part, each is as chaotic as the next, and distinguishing one from another is impossible. # Power Of The Mind Limbo conforms to the will of the creatures inhab- iting it. Creative imaginations can create whole islands of their own invention within the plane, sometimes maintaining those places for years. A nonsapient creature such as a fish, though, might have less than a minute before the pocket of water surrounding it freezes, vanishes, or turns to glass. Slaadi live here and swim amid this chaos, creating nothing, whereas githzerai build entire monasteries with their minds. As a Magic action, a creature in Limbo can make an Intelligence check to mentally move an object within 30 feet of itself that is on the plane and isn't being worn or carried. The DC depends on the ob- ject's size: DC 5 for Tiny, DC 10 for Small, DC 15 for Medium, DC 20 for Large, and DC 25 for Huge or larger. On a successful check, the creature moves the object 5 feet plus a number of a feet equal to how much the total exceeded the DC. A creature can also take a Magic action to make an Intelligence check to alter a nonmagical object within 30 feet of itself that isn't being worn or car- ried. The DC is based on the object's size: DC 10 for Tiny, DC 15 for Small, DC 20 for Medium, and DC 25 for Large or larger. On a successful check, the creature changes the object into another nonliving form of the same size, such as turning a boulder into a ball of fire. Finally, a creature in Limbo can take a Magic ac- tion to make a DC 20 Intelligence check to stabilize an area within a 30-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point it can see on the plane. On a successful check, the creature prevents the area from being al- tered by the plane for 24 hours or until the creature takes this Magic action again. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY # Limbo Adventures Limbo is change, That constant churn is most easily discerned in the ever-shifting physical form of elements altering and reconfiguring in the vast expanse of the plane, but it applies just as much on a mental and emotional level. Visitors to the plane find themselves caught up in a storm of intrusive thoughts and unruly emotions, forcing them to confront the transient nature of so much of what they think of as their identity. The key to success on this plane---both in shaping the physical environment and in mastering the internal landscape of chaos---is asserting one's sense of self, identifying what is unchanging amid the storm of constant change. The sanctuaries of the githzerai are among the few havens that adventurers can hope to find on this tumultuous plane. Although githzerai aren't generally hostile to visitors who come in peace, they don't welcome those who bring the chaos of Limbo with them: a tumultuous heart brought into a ref- uge can unravel the entire sanctuary. Adventurers might also come to Limbo to ex- plore the secrets of the Spawning Stone. Said to have been created by Primus, the overlord of the modrons, the Spawning Stone absorbs chaotic energy and makes it possible to shape enclaves of order in Limbo, but the chaotic energy it absorbs is responsible for the creation of slaadi. # Material Plane Worlds of the Material Plane are infinitely diverse, but it was not always so. Some legends speak of a primordial state, a single reality called the First World, where many of the peoples and monsters that inhabit the worlds on the Material Plane orig- inated. After the First World was shattered by a great cataclysm, the many worlds were formed like reflections or (in some cases) distortions of that original reality. Some myths describe a great tree that grew on the First World at the dawn of time. Planted and tended by the god Corellon, this tree was a seed- ling of Yggdrasil, the World Tree that connects all the Outer Planes (see "Traveling the Outer Planes" earlier in this chapter). When the First World was destroyed, seeds from this great tree scattered into the void of the Material Plane. Legends say that these seeds sprouted and formed worlds of their own---all the myriad worlds that now constitute the Material Plane. The most widely known worlds are the ones that have been published as official campaign settings for the D&D game over the years, many of which are shown on the D&D Settings table in chapter 5. If your campaign takes place in one of these settings, your version of it can diverge wildly from what's in print. With its \# AL MARVELS OF TEC» EBERRON 1 E OF COUNTLESS WOR THE Materiar Plane --- # Traveling Between Worlds Transit between the worlds of the Material Plane is rare but not impossible and can be accomplished in a variety of ways. The Dream of Other Worlds. Aided by magic, travelers can fall into a deep slumber and dream themselves into a new realm. The Great Journey. Characters can undertake an epic voyage fraught with peril and obstacles to be overcome. One route leads through Wildspace and across the Astral Plane aboard a vessel powered by magic. (The "Astral Plane" section in this chapter describes Wildspace.) It is also possible to travel through the Shadowfell or the Feywild, though such routes are less charted and no less perilous. The Leap to Another Realm. The most direct method involves the use of spells such as Teleporta- tion Circle or Teleport, or magical portals like those described in this chapter. This magic causes the user to appear in a known teleportation circle or some other location in another world. The Roots of the Worlds. Similar to magical por- tals, nexus points are locations that exist in mul- tiple worlds at the same time. These points might be located at or near the roots of the worlds---the places where the seedlings of the First World's great tree took root and grew into a new world. A nexus point can be a geographical feature, such as an enormous tree, a mountain or mesa, a yawning cavern deep under the mountains, or a meteorite in an enormous crater. It might also be a constructed feature: a lonely tower or castle, a bustling tavern, or even a city. Normally, visitors to these places return to the same world they came from when they depart, but it's also possible to use a nexus point to travel from one world to another. De- pending on the place, shifting worlds might require the use of magic, an object from the desired destina- tion world as a sort of key, or nothing more than an act of will. Some nexus points exist in multiple worlds---but not at the same time. They flit from world to world, disappearing from one and appearing in another according to a regular schedule. Such a place might linger on one world for anywhere from a year to an hour before moving on to another, carrying every- one inside with it to a new world. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 199 MECHANUS Mechanus is where perfectly regimented order reigns supreme. It consists of equal measures of light and dark, and equal proportions of heat and cold. On Mechanus, law is reflected in a realm of gigantic clockwork gears, interlocked and turning according to their measure. The cogs seem to be engaged in a calculation so vast that no deity can fathom its purpose. Some theories hold that they are the clockwork of time throughout the cosmos--- that time itself would stop if the gears ceased their turning. Other theories propose that the cogs up- hold the basic rules and order of the cosmos. Modrons are the primary inhabitants of Mecha- nus and maintain its intricate clockworks. The plane is also home to the creator of the modrons: a godlike being called Primus, whose realm is called Regulus. Mechanus has no distinct layers. Each turning cog has its own force of gravity pulling toward its cen- ter, with structures built on the faces of the cogs. Some of the cogs are like small islands, while others are hundreds of miles across. # Mechanus Adventures Mechanus embodies absolute order, and it influ- ences those who spend time here. Individual con- sciousness is subordinated to the search for perfect order, and "I" is ultimately subsumed into "we." An adventure on Mechanus might lead characters to examine their individual egos in the light of the adventuring party. It might challenge a character to set aside personal goals for the benefit of the group (or the greater cause of cosmic law), or alternatively it might encourage characters to assert their own individual identities, distinct from the party and possessing their own goals and needs. MOuNT CELESTIA The Seven Heavens of Mount Celestia rise like a mountain from a shining Silver Sea to utterly incomprehensible heights, with seven plateaus marking its seven heavenly layers. The plane is the model of justice and order, of celestial grace and endless mercy, where angels and champions of good guard against incursions of evil. It is one of the few places on the planes where travelers can let down their guard. Its inhabitants strive constantly to be THE SEVEN HEAVENS © # Celestia Becko TOWARD EVER-GREATER HEIGHTS 2s righteous as possible. Countless creatures aim to reach the highest and most sublime peak of the mountain, but only the purest souls can. That peak Sills even the most jaded of travelers with awe. The pervasive goodness of Mount Celestia be- stows blessings on creatures on the plane (see "En- vironmental Effects" in chapter 3). Layers OF MounrtT CELESTIA Layer Description Lunia In the Silver Heaven, the holy water of the Silver Sea laps at the base of the celestial mountain under a starry sky. Mercuria) The Golden Heaven's tame slopes and lush valleys are bathed in golden light that evokes the hope of a new dawn. Venya In the Pearly Heaven, terraced fields and tended woodlands dot the snowy slopes. In the Crystal Heaven, holy shrines glitter under a silvery sky amid lumi- nescent fog. On the sweeping plains of the Plati- num Heaven, holy soldiers muster in grand citadels for battles across the planes. Solania 'Mertion jovar The Glittering Heaven, strewn with beautiful rubies and garnets, is home to the seven-tiered Heavenly City. The Illuminated Heaven is an ineffable mystery. 'Chronias MounT CELESTIA ADVENTURES The plane of ultimate law and good is sometimes smagined to be the most boring place in the multi- verse, but in truth Mount Celestia's nature makes = the target of unrelenting attacks by evil forces. The devils of the Nine Hells, in particular, long to corrupt the goodness of the Seven Heavens. The segoloths of the Lower Planes covet the wealth of the plane, particularly the mines of Solania and the scattered gems of Jovar. And the demons of the Abyss would like nothing better to smear their filth om the gleaming purity of Mount Celestia. But while Fiends of all sorts launch doomed as- saults on the shores of Lunia, evil's true foothold on the plane is in the hearts of those well-meaning \~wisitors who bring their secret shame and hidden sims to the holy mountain. An adventure in Mount Celestia is an opportunity for characters to prove themselves worthy of the many blessings it offerser to become worthy by forswearing the selfishness, ereed, and hatred that lurk in their hearts. On the edge of a clear lake in Mertion stands the city of Empyrea, renowned for the healing power of its fountains and springs. Pilgrims from across the planes seek out the healers, hospitals, and restorative magic found here. # Negative Plane Cupped like a bowl beneath the other planes, the Negative Plane is the source of necrotic energy that destroys the living and animates the Undead. A lightless void without end, it is a needy, greedy plane, sucking the life out of anything that is vul- nerable. Heat, fire, and life itself are all drawn into the maw of this plane, which always hungers for more. To an observer, there's little to see on the Negative Plane. It is a dark, empty place, an eternal pit where a traveler can fall until the plane steals away all light and life. Merely entering the plane is compa- rable to the life-draining touch of a wraith, so only creatures that have Immunity to Necrotic damage can survive there for long. In some locations on the Negative Plane, the in- tensity of the plane is so great that the negative en- ergy folds in on itself, stabilizing into solid chunks of matter that devour light. These chunks, called voidstones, are thought to be the source of Spheres of Annihilation and similar magical effects. Anything that comes into contact with a voidstone is de- stroyed in seconds. # Negative Plane Adventures An adventure on the Negative Plane is a face-to-face confrontation with annihilation, which is unlikely to end well for the adventurers. Even if their magic enables them to survive the environment of the plane, the experience tends to drain all the vitality, energy, and happiness from body and soul. The Neg- ative Plane has all the apathy and despair of Hades and the Shadowfell, combined and concentrated in an infinite expanse of nonbeing and uncreation. # Nine Hells The Nine Hells inflames the imaginations of trav- elers, the greed of treasure seekers, and the battle fury of all moral creatures. It is the ultimate plane of law and evil, and the epitome of premeditated cruelty. The devils of the Nine Hells are bound to obey the laws of their superiors, but they squabble within their individual castes. Most undertake any plot, no matter how foul, to advance themselves. At the very top of the hierarchy is Asmodeus, who has yet to be bested. If he were vanquished, the victor would rule the plane in turn. Such is the law of the Nine Hells. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 201 202 THE NINE Layers The Nine Hells has nine layers. The first eight are ruled by archdevils who answer to Asmodeus, the archduke of Nessus, the ninth layer. Collectively, the rulers of the Hells are called the Lords of the Nine. To reach Nessus, one must descend through all eight layers above it in order, The most expeditious means of doing so is the River Styx, which plunges ever deeper as it flows from one layer to the next. Only the most courageous adventurers can withstand the torment and horror of that journey. The Layers of the Nine Hells table summarizes each layer; detailed descriptions of these layers fol- low the table. LAYERS OF THE NINE HELLS Description The Blood War rages across battle- fields littered with corpses and the wreckage of hellish war machines. Dis Iron roads in deep canyons lead to the dreaded Iron City of Dis. Layer Avernus Minauros Acid falls like rain on putrid bogs and decaying cities. Phlegethos Obsidian fortresses bask in the heat of raging volcanoes and magma rivers. Stygia Levistus's prison is a frigid hellscape of jagged ice and cold fire. Malbolge ---\_ An ever-crumbling mountain threatens to bury visitors. Maladomini Swarms of hungry flies plague dead cities surrounded by utter desolation. Cania Ice-trapped cities provide shelter in a realm cold enough to freeze the soul. Nessus Mighty fortresses stand watch over the deepest pits of the Nine Hells. Avernus. By Asmodeus's orders, no planar portals connect directly to the lower layers of the Nine Hells. The first layer, Avernus, is the arrival point for visitors, a rocky wasteland with rivers of blood and clouds of biting flies. Fiery comets occasionally fall from the darkened sky and carve out fuming impact craters. Empty battlefields are littered with weapons and bones, showing where the legions of the Nine Hells prevailed against invading enemies. The archdevil Zariel rules Avernus, having sup- planted her rival, Bel, who fell out of Asmodeus's fa- vor and was forced to serve as Zariel's adviser. Tia- mat, the Queen of Evil Dragons, is a prisoner on this layer, ruling her own domain but confined to the Nine Hells by Asmodeus in accordance with some ancient contract (the terms of which are known only to Tiamat and the Lords of the Nine). # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY Zariel appears as an angel whose skin and wings are scorched. Her eyes burn with a furious white light that can cause creatures looking upon her to burst into flame. Her seat of power is a flying basalt citadel that rakes the battlefields of Avernus. Dis. Dis, the second layer of the Nine Hells, is a labyrinth of canyons wedged between sheer moun- tains rich with iron ore. Iron roads span and wend through the canyons, watched over by the garrisons of iron fortresses perched atop jagged pinnacles. The second layer takes its name from its current lord, Dispater. A manipulator and deceiver, the archduke is devilishly handsome, bearing only small horns, a tail, and a cloven left hoof to distinguish him from a human. His crimson throne stands in the heart of the Iron City of Dis, a hideous metrop- olis. Planar travelers come here to conspire with devils and to close deals with night hags, rakshasas, incubi, succubi, and other Fiends. Contracts signed on his layer contain special provisions that allow Dispater to collect a cut of the deal. Dispater is one of Asmodeus's most loyal and re- sourceful vassals, and few beings in the multiverse can outwit him. He is more obsessed than most devils with striking deals with mortals in exchange for their souls, and his emissaries work tirelessly to foster evil schemes on the Material Plane. Minauros. The third layer of the Nine Hells is a stench-ridden bog. Acidic rain spills from the layer's brown skies, thick layers of scum cover its putrid surface, and yawning pits lie in wait beneath the murk to engulf careless wanderers. Cyclopean cities of ornately carved stone rise up from the bog, including the great city of Minauros, for which the layer is named. The slimy walls of the city rise hundreds of feet, protecting the flooded halls that are the lair of Mammon, the archduke of Minauros. Mammon resembles a massive serpent with the upper torso and head of a hairless, horned humanoid. Mammon's greed is legendary, and he is one of the few archdevils who will trade favors for gold instead of souls. His lair is piled high with trea- sures left behind by those who tried---and failed---to best him in a deal. Phlegethos. Phlegethos, the fourth layer, is a fiery landscape whose seas of molten magma brew hurri- canes of hot wind, choking smoke, and volcanic ash. Within the fire-filled caldera of Phlegethos's largest volcano rises Abriymoch, a fortress city made of obsidian and dark glass. With rivers of molten lava pouring down its outer walls, the city resembles the sculpted centerpiece of a gigantic, hellish fountain. Abriymoch is the seat of power for the two arch- devils who rule Phlegethos in tandem: Belial and Fierna, Belial's daughter. Both are handsome devils who resemble tieflings, with red skin and small horns. Belial exudes civility, even as his words carry an undercurrent of threat. His daughter is said to have the wickedest heart in the Nine Hells. The al- liance of Belial and Fierna is unbreakable, for both are aware that their mutual survival hinges on it. Stygia. The fifth layer of the Nine Hells is a freez- ing realm of ice within which cold flames burn. A frozen sea surrounds the layer, and its gloomy sky crackles with lightning. Archduke Levistus once betrayed Asmodeus and is now encased deep in the ice of Stygia as punish- ment. He rules this layer all the same, communicat- ng telepathically with his followers and servants, both in the Nine Hells and on the Material Plane. Stygia is also home to its previous ruler, the ser- pentine archdevil Geryon, who was dismissed by Asmodeus to allow the imprisoned Levistus to re- zain his rule. Geryon's fall from grace has spurred much debate within the infernal courts. No one is certain whether Asmodeus had some secret cause to dismiss the archdevil or whether he is testing Gery- n's allegiance for some greater purpose. Malbolge. Malbolge, the sixth layer, has outlasted many rulers, among them Malagard the Hag Count- ess and the archdevil Moloch. Malagard fell out of favor and was struck down by Asmodeus in a fit of pique, while her predecessor, Moloch, still lingers somewhere on the sixth layer as an imp, plotting to THE FIRST OF THE Nine Meicts, AVERNUS, Is AN ETERNAL BATTLEFIELD IN THE BLooD War regain Asmodeus''s favor. Malbolge is a seemingly endless slope, like the sides of an impossibly huge mountain. Parts of the layer break off from time to time, creating deadly, booming avalanches. The inhabitants of Malbolge live in crumbling fortresses and great caves carved into the mountainside. Malbolge's current ruler is Asmodeus's daughter, Glasya. Her cruelty and love of wicked schemes ri- val those of her father. The citadel that serves as her domicile on the slopes of Malbolge, called Osseia, is supported by cracked pillars and buttresses that are sturdy yet seem on the verge of collapse. Beneath the palace is a labyrinth lined with cells and torture chambers, where Glasya confines and torments those who displease her. Maladomini. The seventh layer, Maladomini, is ruin-covered wasteland. Dead cities form a des- olate urban landscape, and between them are empty quarries, crumbling roads, slag heaps, the hollow shells of empty fortresses, and swarms of hungry flies. The archduke of Maladomini is Baalzebul, the Lord of Flies. He is a tall, powerful devil with the compound eyes of a fly. The archduke has long con- spired to usurp Asmodeus, yet has failed at every turn. Asmodeus laid a curse on him that causes any deal made with him to lead to calamity. Asmodeus # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 203 occasionally shows Baalzebul favor for reasons no other archduke can fathom, though some suspect that Asmodeus still respects the worthiness of this adversary. Cania, Cania, the eighth layer of the Nine Hells, is a frozen hellscape whose ice storms can tear flesh from bone. Cities embedded in the ice provide shelter for guests and prisoners of Cania's ruler, the brilliant and conniving archdevil Mephistopheles. Mephistopheles dwells in the ice citadel of Mephistar, where he plots to seize the throne of the Nine Hells and conquer all the planes. He is Asmo- deus's greatest enemy and ally, and the archduke of Nessus appears to trust Mephistopheles's counsel. Mephistopheles knows he can't depose Asmodeus until his adversary makes a fatal miscalculation, and so both wait to discover what circumstances might turn them against each other. Mephistopheles is also a godfather of sorts to Glasya, further complicating the relationship between Mephistopheles and Asmodeus. Mephistopheles is a tall, striking devil with im- pressive horns and a cool demeanor. He trades in souls, as do other archdevils, but he rarely gives his time to any creatures not worthy of his personal attention. It is said that only Asmodeus has ever deceived or thwarted him. Nessus. The lowest layer of the Nine Hells, Nes- sus is a realm of dark pits whose walls are set with bleak fortresses. There, pit fiend generals loyal to Asmodeus garrison their diabolical legions and plot the conquest of the multiverse. At the center of the layer stands a vast rift of unknown depth, out of which rises the great citadel-spire of Malsheem, home to Asmodeus and his infernal court. Malsheem resembles a gigantic hollowed-out stalagmite. The citadel is also a prison for souls that Asmodeus has locked away for safekeeping. Convincing him to release even one of those souls comes at a steep price, and it is rumored that As- modeus has claimed whole kingdoms in the past in exchange for such favors. Asmodeus most often appears as a handsome, bearded man with four large horns, piercing red eyes, and flowing robes. He can also assume other forms and sometimes carries a ruby-tipped scepter. Asmodeus is the most cunning and well-mannered of archdevils. On the surface, he seems warm, pleas- ant, and lighthearted, doling out wisdom and small acts of kindness like a caring father. The ultimate evil he represents can be seen only when he wills it so, or if he forgets himself and flies into a rage. & mn \> ASMODEUS, THE LORO OF THE Nine MAINTAINS A VENEER OF PLEASANTRY WHILE # Inflicting Agony On Imprisoned Souls # Infernal Hierarchy The Nine Hells has a rigid hierarchy that defines every aspect of its society. Asmodeus is the supreme ruler of all devils and wields the power of a lesser god. Worshiped as such on the Material Plane, Asmodeus inspires evil cults and sinister War- locks. In the Nine Hells, he commands scores of pit fiend generals, which in turn command legions of subordinates. A supreme tyrant, a brilliant deceiver, and a mas- ter of subtlety, Asmodeus protects his throne by keeping his friends close and his enemies closer. He delegates most matters of rulership to the pit fiends and lesser archdevils that make up the infernal bu- reaucracy of the Nine Hells, even as he knows that those powerful devils conspire to usurp his throne. Asmodeus appoints archdevils, and he can strip any member of the infernal hierarchy of rank and status as he likes. # Infernal Hierarchy Least Devils Greater Devils 1. Lemure 8. Horned devil Lesser Devils 9. Erinyes 2. Imp 10. Ice devil 3. Spined devil 11. Pit fiend 4. Bearded devil Archdevils 5. Barbed devil 6. Chain devil 7. Bone devil Archdevils. The archdevils include all the current and deposed rulers of the Nine Hells, as well as the fiendish aristocrats that make up their courts, attend them as advisers, and hope to supplant them. Promotion and Demotion. When the soul of an evil mortal sinks into the Nine Hells, it takes on the physical form of a wretched lemure. Archdevils and greater devils can promote lemures to lesser devils. Archdevils can promote lesser devils to greater dev- ils, and Asmodeus alone can promote a greater devil to archdevil status. All diabolic promotions involve a brief, painful transformation, with the devil's memories passing intact from one form to the next. Low-level promotions are typically based on need, such as when a pit fiend transforms lemures into imps to gain stealthy spies under its command. High-level promotions are almost always based on merit, such as when a bone devil that distinguishes itself in battle is transformed into a horned devil by the archdevil it serves. A devil is seldom promoted more than one step at a time. Demotion is the customary punishment for failure or disobedience among the devils. Archdevils or greater devils can demote a lesser devil to a lemure, which loses all memory of its prior existence. An archdevil can demote a greater devil to lesser devil 12. Duke/duchess 13. Archduke/archduchess status, but the demoted devil retains its memories--- and might seek vengeance if the severity of the de- motion is excessive. No devil can promote or demote another devil that hasn't sworn fealty to it, preventing rival arch- devils from demoting each other's most powerful servants. Since all devils swear fealty to Asmodeus, he can freely demote any other devil, transforming it into whatever infernal form he desires. # Nine Hells Adventures The Nine Hells embodies the cruelty and corrup- tion of law turned to evil ends. The devils of the Nine Hells are more cunning, more insidious, and far more dangerous than other Fiends. Their intelligence, their delight in deceit and manipulation, and their unhindered pursuit of their own agendas make them truly terrifying foes. A descent into the Nine Hells is a journey into the heart of evil. Every shred of evil is used in the Nine Hells, and each layer specializes in some way to accommodate and exploit the vices and weaknesses of mortals. Far too many people who make such a journey discover their own hearts aren't immune to temptation and corruption, and they end up making the Nine Hells their eternal home. To avoid such a fate, good-hearted adventurers must resist the insidious manipulation, deceit, and treachery of devils, even when the devils promise to fulfill their deepest longings. OUTLANDS The Outlands lies between the Outer Planes. It is the plane of neutrality, keeping all aspects of the planes in a paradoxical balance---simultaneously concordant and in opposition. The plane has varied terrain, with prairies, mountains, and shallow rivers. The Outlands is a great disk. In fact, those who envision the Outer Planes as a wheel point to the Outlands as proof, calling it a microcosm of the planes. That argument might be circular, since the arrangement of the Outlands inspired the idea of the Great Wheel in the first place. Evenly spaced around the outside edge of the circle are the gate-towns: sixteen settlements, each built around a portal leading to one of the Outer Planes. The Gate-Towns of the Outlands table lists all sixteen gate-towns and the Outer Planes they connect to. Each gate-town shares many of the characteristics of the plane where its gate leads. Planar emissaries often meet in these gate-towns, so it isn't unusual to see strange interactions, such as a Celestial and a Fiend arguing in a tavern while shar- ing a fine bottle of wine. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY 205 206 # Gate-towns Of The Outlands Town Gate Destination Automata Mechanus Bedlam Pandemonium Curst Carceri Ecstasy Elysium Excelsior Mount Celestia Faunel Beastlands Fortitude Arcadia Glorium Ysgard Hopeless Hades Plague-Mort Abyss Ribcage Nine Hells Rigus Acheron Sylvania Arborea Torch Gehenna Tradegate Bytopia Xaos Limbo OUTLANDS ADVENTURES The Outlands is the closest the Outer Planes come to being like a world on the Material Plane. Adventurers can travel easily from one gate- town to the next, making a tremendous variety of planar-themed adventures possible within the boundaries of the Outlands. Adventures in the Outlands often involve the con- flicts between opposing planar influences. It's much easier for a slaad to wreak havoc in the gate-town of Automata than it is for even a horde of slaadi to accomplish anything in Mechanus itself. Celestial spies and Fiend assassins carry out subtle plots and deadly sabotage across the Outlands, Despite these conflicts, the Outlands remains a plane of balance. Toward the center of the plane, away from the gate-towns, lie vast stretches of land similar to the different environments found on worlds of the Material Plane. Preserving nature's balance from the pull of powerful extremes in any direction can also be a theme of adventures here. Planescape: Adventures in the Multiverse includes extensive information on the Outlands. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY PANDEMONIUM Pandemonium is a plane of overwhelming chaos, a great mass of rock riddled with tunnels carved by howling winds. It is cold, noisy, and dark, with no natural light. Wind quickly extinguishes non- magical open flames such as torches and campfires. It also makes conversation possible only by yell- ing, and even then only to a maximum distance of 10 feet. See "Environmental Effects" in chap- ter 3 for more information about the winds of Pandemonium. Most of the plane's inhabitants are creatures that were banished to the plane with no hope of escape. The incessant winds force them to take shelter in places where the howls of the winds sound like dis- tant cries of torment. LAYERS OF PANDEMONIUM Layer Description Pandesmos Howling winds, dark streams bound for the River Styx, and blowing snow pour through vast, desolate caverns. Winds blowing through narrower tun- nels create a stronger force and louder wails, making this the so-called "Layer of Lamentation." Phlegethon Tunnel walls absorb light while water creates intricate rock formations. Sealed-off tunnels are largely inaccessi- ble from elsewhere, making them ideal as vaults for ancient secrets. Cocytus Agathion PANDEMONIUM ADVENTURES Pandemonium is the plane of last straws. The inces- sant howling of its winds brings everyone on the plane, sooner or later, to the edge of lashing out in frustration, breaking down in despair, or dissolving into incoherence---and then some event, force, or creature on the plane pushes them over that edge. Simply existing on the plane is exhausting; trying to accomplish even a basic conversation is aggravating. An adventure in Pandemonium can be a way to explore what happens to characters on their worst day, when everything goes wrong and the howling wind won't let up. The trick is to convey the frustra- tion that characters are bound to experience there without transferring that frustration to the players. A jagged spike somewhere in Cocytus, called Howler's Crag, is rumored to have a unique magical property: anything yelled from the top of the crag is said to find the ears of its intended recipient--- carried on a shrieking, frigid wind---no matter where in the multiverse that person might be. # Three Adventurers Brave The Howling Winos Of Pandemonium In Search Of How.er's Crac # Para-elemental Planes The regions where the Elemental Planes collide and their elemental substances overlap are called Para- elemental Planes. # Plane Of Ash On the Plane of Ash, also called the Great Confla- gration, howling winds from the Plane of Air mix with the cinder storms and lava of the Sea of Fire. This plane is an endless storm of flames, smoke, and ash. The thick ash obscures sight beyond a few dozen feet, and the battering winds make travel difficult. Here and there, ash clusters into floating realms where outlaws and fugitives take shelter. # Plane Of Ice The Plane of Ice, also called the Frostfell, forms the border between the Plane of Air and the Plane of Water. This plane is a seemingly endless glacier swept by constant, raging blizzards. Frozen cav- erns twist through the Plane of Ice, home to yetis, remorhazes, white dragons, and other creatures of cold. The inhabitants of the plane engage ina never-ending battle to prove their strength and ensure their survival. \< =\~ y IAN ', 37 - Wh "4 \| = \>» f (ia =\~ al a ahs a 1. % ' bt cre ay ' } - ae } \<s "@ lr #8 " ha = The Frostfell's monsters and bitter cold make it a dangerous place to travel. Most planar voyagers keep to the air, braving the powerful winds and driving snow to avoid setting foot on the great glacier. # Plane Of Magma The boundary between the Plane of Earth and the Plane of Fire is a great range of volcanic mountains, The Plane of Magma, also called the Fountains of Creation, is home to azers, fire giants, and red dragons, as well as creatures from the neighboring planes. Lava flows down the slopes of these moun- tains toward the Plane of Fire, # Plane Of Ooze The border region between the Plane of Water and the Plane of Earth is a horrid swamp where gnarled trees and thick, stinging vines grow from the dense muck and slime. Here and there on the Plane of Ooze (also called the Swamp of Oblivion), stag- nant lakes and pools play host to thickets of weeds and monstrous swarms of mosquitoes. The few settlements here consist of wooden structures pended above the muck on platforms bet» COSMOLOGY 208 Visitors to the plane have sometimes tried elevating houses on poles stuck in the mud, but since no solid earth underlies the muck, even such structures eventually sink. It is said that any object cast into the Swamp of Oblivion can't be found again for at least a century. Now and then, a desperate soul casts an Artifact of power into this place, keeping it away from the rest of the multiverse for a time. The promise of power- ful magic lures adventurers to brave the monstrous insects and hags of the swamp. # Para-elemental Plane Adventures The Para-elemental Planes are extreme environ- ments but fundamentally similar to places found on the Material Plane---the place where all four ele- ments mingle freely. At a symbolic level, the Para-elemental Planes rep- resent the interaction and sometimes the contrast between the forces and ideals embodied by their constituent elements, The Plane of Ash, for exam- ple, highlights the commonality between air and fire---the tendency to movement and change, given a destructive tone by the raging conflagration of the plane. The Plane of Ooze heightens the contrast between stable, rigid earth and steadily flowing water. # Positive Plane Like a dome above the other planes, the Positive Plane is the source of radiant energy and the raw life force that suffuses all living beings. Like the heart of a star, it is a continual furnace of creation, a domain of brilliance beyond the ability of mortal eyes to comprehend. It is a vibrant plane, so alive that travelers are empowered by visiting it. The Positive Plane has no surface and is akin to the Elemental Plane of Air with its wide-open nature. However, every bit of this plane glows brightly with innate power. This power is dangerous to mortal forms, which can't handle it for long. Only creatures that have Immunity to Radiant damage can survive there. # Positive Plane Adventures Vibrant life, creative energy, and radiant health are the essential characteristics of the Positive Plane, though touching this fundamental energy can be just as dangerous as entering the soul-siphoning annihilation of the Negative Plane. Characters who survive an excursion into the Positive Plane often find that it leaves them with a lasting charge, mak- ing it hard to calm down, to stem the flow of ideas, and even to sleep. On the other hand, they also find themselves with a persistent resistance to disease and despair. # CHAPTER \| COSMOLOGY = - ee SHADOWFELL The Shadowfell, also called the Plane of Shadow, is a gloomy dimension whose sky is a black vault with neither sun nor stars. The Shadowfell overlaps the Material Plane in much the same way as the Feywild. Aside from the bleak landscape, it appears similar to the Material Plane. Travelers from the Material Plane who enter the Shadowfell often observe landmarks similar to the world they left, but distorted and often sin- ister. A mountain on the Material Plane might be replaced in the Shadowfell by a skull-shaped rock outcropping, a heap of rubble, or the crumbling ruin of a once-great castle. The forests of the Shadowfell hold sinister-looking trees, their branches reaching out to snare travelers' cloaks, and their roots coiling to trip those who pass by. Shadow dragons and Undead haunt this bleak plane, as do other creatures that thrive in the gloom, including cloakers and darkmantles. SHADOW CRrossINGs Shadow crossings are locations where the veil between the Material Plane and the Shadowfell is so thin that creatures can pass from one plane to the other. A blot of shadow in the corner of a dusty crypt might be a shadow crossing, as might an open grave. Shadow crossings form in gloomy places where spirits or the stench of death lingers, such as battlefields, graveyards, and tombs, They manifest only in darkness, closing as soon as they feel light's kiss. # Domains Of Dread In a far-flung corner of the Shadowfell drifts a hid- den expanse of roiling mist and vague semireality. At this eerie edge of the multiverse, mysterious entities known as the Dark Powers collect the most wicked beings from across ages and worlds within inescapable, mist-shrouded demiplanes. In these shadowy prisons, the villainous beings become Darklords, able to exercise great power but confined to realms that twist their desires, capturing them in cycles of dread and despair. Mists surround each of the Domains of Dread, making it difficult to leave one domain and even harder to find a path to another. The Mists rise and fall at the whim of the Dark Powers, and they can even slip across the planes to drag people unwit- tingly into the dread domains. Those who live in these domains ascribe all sorts of sinister stories to the Mists---any supernatural happening, inexplica- ble disappearance, or malicious force can be blamed on the Mists. THe SHADOWFELL {5 A REALM OF DEATH,