# CHAPTER \| TREASURE 299 Rop or LoRDLY MIGHT Rod, Legendary (Requires Attunement) This rod has a flanged head, and it functions as a magic Mace that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. The rod has proper- ties associated with six different buttons that are set in a row along the haft. It has three other properties as well, detailed below. Buttons. You can press one of the following but- tons as a Bonus Action; a button's effect lasts until you push a different button or until you push the same button again, which causes the rod to revert to its normal form: Roo oF Rucerswip Roo oF Loro.y Micur Roo or » REsuRRECTION Rope oF ENTANGLEMENT CHAPTER \| TREASURE --- ee eeButton 1. A fiery blade sprouts from the site the rod's flanged head. The flames @ Light in a 40-foot radius and Dim Licte tee additional 40 feet, and the blade functions. magic Longsword or Shortsword (your & that deals an extra 2d6 Fire damage om © Button 2. The rod's flanged head folds 4 two crescent-shaped blades spring cut && ing the rod into a magic Battleaxe thet == +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage» with it. Button 3. The rod's flanged head folds ae spear point springs from the rod's tig. ant! rod's handle lengthens into a 6-foot ha forming the rod into a magic Spear that +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rally with it. Button 4. The rod transforms into 2 Cinw up to 50 feet long (you specify the lene the rod's buttons remain within your ===) surfaces as hard as granite, a spike at te tom and three hooks at the top ancher tie Horizontal bars 3 inches long fold out & sides, 1 foot apart, forming a ladder. The bear up to 4,000 pounds. More weie®t of solid anchoring causes the rod to news normal form. Button 5. The rod transforms into 2 has battering ram and grants its user 2 9 to Strength (Athletics) checks made ® \* through doors, barricades, and other han=y Button 6. The rod assumes or remains & mal form and indicates magnetic nart® © happens if this function of the rod & ase & location that has no magnetic north) Ties gives you knowledge of your approxima. beneath the ground or your height shew = Drain Life. When you hit a creature attack using the rod, you can force the make a DC 17 Constitution saving throw 7 save, the target takes an extra 4d6 Neceste age, and you regain a number of Hit Poi half that Necrotic damage. Once used. Se can't be used again until the next dawn Paralyze. When you hit a creature wa® tack using the rod, you can force the tanga a DC 17 Constitution saving throw. On = & the target has the Paralyzed condition fee" The target repeats the save at the end of « turns, ending the effect on a success. Ome this property can't be used again until Ge dawn. Terrify. While holding the rod, you cam Magic action to force each creature pow within 30 feet of yourself to make 2 DC saving throw. On a failed save, a target ® Frightened condition for 1 minute. A Frightened target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn, RopD OF RESURRECTION Rod, Legendary (Requires Attunement) The rod has 5 charges. While you hold it, you can cast one of the following spells from it: Heal (ex- pends \| charge) or Resurrection (expends 5 charges). The rod regains 1 expended charge daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a1, the rod disappears in a harmless burst of radiance. Rop OF RULERSHIP Rod, Rare (Requires Attunement) You can take a Magic action to present the rod and command obedience from each creature of your choice that you can see within 120 feet of your- self. Each target must succeed on a DC 15 Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for 8 hours. While Charmed in this way, the creature re- gards you as its trusted leader. If harmed by you or your allies or commanded to do something contrary to its nature, a target ceases to be Charmed in this way. Once used, this property can't be used again until the next dawn. Rop oF SECURITY Rod, Very Rare While holding this rod, you can take a Magic action to activate it. The rod then instantly transports you and up to 199 other willing creatures you can see to a demiplane. You choose the form the demiplane takes. It could be a tranquil garden, a cheery tavern, an immense palace, a tropical island, a fantastic car- nival, or whatever else you can imagine. Regardless of its nature, the demiplane contains enough water and food to sustain its visitors, and the demiplane's environment can't harm its occupants. Everything else that can be interacted with there can exist only there. For example, a flower picked from a garden there disappears if it is taken outside the demiplane. For each hour spent in the demiplane, a visitor regains Hit Points as if it had spent 1 Hit Point Die. Also, creatures don't age while there, although time passes normally. Visitors can remain there for up to 200 days divided by the number of creatures pres- ent (round down). When the time runs out or you take a Magic ac- tion to end the effect, all visitors reappear in the location they occupied when you activated the rod or an unoccupied space nearest that location. Once used, this property can't be used again until 10 days have passed. Pe = Rop OF THE PAcT KEEPER Rod, Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3) (Requires Attunement by a Warlock) While holding this rod, you gain a bonus to spell attack rolls and to the saving throw DCs of your Warlock spells. The bonus is determined by the rod's rarity. In addition, you can regain one spell slot as a Magic action while holding the rod. You can't use this property again until you finish a Long Rest. ROPE OF CLIMBING Wondrous Item, Uncommon This 60-foot length of rope can hold up to 3,000 pounds. While holding one end of the rope, you can take a Magic action to command the other end of the rope to animate and move toward a destination you choose, up to the rope's length away from you. That end moves 10 feet on your turn when you first command it and 10 feet at the start of each of your subsequent turns until reaching its destination or until you tell it to stop. You can also tell the rope to fasten itself securely to an object or to unfasten itself, to knot or unknot itself, or to coil itself for carrying. If you tell the rope to knot, large knots appear at 1-foot intervals along the rope. While knotted, the rope shortens to a 50-foot length and grants Advan- tage on ability checks made to climb using the rope. The rope has AC 20, HP 20, and Immunity to Poi- son and Psychic damage. It regains 1 Hit Point every 5 minutes as long as it has at least 1 Hit Point. If the rope drops to O Hit Points, it is destroyed. c - - --- --- ROPE OF ENTANGLEMENT Wondrous Item, Rare This rope is 30 feet long. While holding one end of the rope, you can take a Magic action to command the other end to dart forward and entangle one creature you can see within 20 feet of yourself. The target must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or have the Restrained condition. You can re- lease the target by letting go of your end of the rope (causing the rope to coil up in the target's space) or by using a Bonus Action to repeat the command (causing the rope to coil up in your hand). # CHAPTER \| TREASURE gor 302 A target Restrained by the rope can take an action to make its choice of a DC 15 Strength (Athletics) or Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. On a successful check, the target is no longer Restrained by the rope. If you're still holding onto the rope when a target es- capes from it, you can take a Reaction to command the rope to coil up in your hand; otherwise, the rope coils up in the target's space. The rope has AC 20, HP 20, and Immunity to Poi- son and Psychic damage. It regains 1 Hit Point every 5 minutes as long as it has at least 1 Hit Point. If the rope drops to O Hit Points, it is destroyed. ROPE OF MENDING Wondrous Item, Common This 50-foot coil of rope can repair itself when cut into any number of smaller pieces. As a Magic ac- tion, you can cause all pieces of the rope that are in contact with each other and not otherwise in use to knit back together. A Rope of Mending is forever shortened if a section of it is lost or destroyed. RuBY OF THE WAR MAGE Wondrous Item, Common (Requires Attunement by a Spellcaster) Etched with eldritch runes, this 1-inch-diameter ruby allows you to use a Simple or Martial weapon as a Spellcasting Focus for your spells. For this property to work, you must attach the ruby to the weapon by pressing the ruby against it for at least 10 minutes. Thereafter, the ruby can't be removed unless you detach it as a Magic action, the weapon is destroyed, or your Attunement to the ruby ends. SADDLE OF THE CAVALIER Wondrous Item, Uncommon This saddle confers the following benefits while you are seated in it and astride a mount. Protected Mount. Attack rolls against the mount have Disadvantage. Secure Rider. You can't be dismounted against your will. This property is suppressed while you have the Incapacitated condition. SCARAB OF PROTECTION Wondrous Item, Legendary (Requires Attunement) This beetle-shaped medallion provides three bene- fits while it is on your person. Defense, You gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. Preservation. The scarab has 12 charges. If you fail a saving throw against a Necromancy spell or a harmful effect originating from an Undead, you # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Scaras or PROTECTION can take a Reaction to expend \| charge and turn the failed save into a successful one. The scarab crumbles into powder and is destroyed when its last charge is expended. Spell Resistance. You have Advantage on saving throws against spells. SCIMITAR OF SPEED Weapon (Scimitar), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this magic weapon. In addition, you can make one attack with it as a Bonus Action on each of your turns. SCROLL OF PROTECTION Scroll, Rare Each Scroll of Protection works against creatures of a specific creature type chosen by the DM or deter- mined by rolling on the following table. 1d100 Creature Type 1d100 Creature Type 01-10 Aberrations 51-60 Fey 11-15 Beasts 61-70 Fiends 16-20 Celestials 71-75 Giants 21-25 Constructs 76-80 Monstrosities 26-35 Dragons 81-85 Oozes 36-45 Elementals 86-90 Plants 46-50 Humanoids 91-00 Undead Scrout oF PROTECTION Using a Magic action to read the scroll creates a 5-foot Emanation originating from you. For 5 min- utes, creatures of the specified type can't enter or affect anything in the area. However, if you move in such a way that a creature of the specified type would be inside the area, the effect ends. As a Magic action, a creature within 5 feet of the Emanation can attempt to overcome it, which forces the creature to make a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a successful save, the creature ceases to be affected by the Emanation. SCROLL OF TITAN SUMMONING Scroll, Legendary When you take a Magic action to read this scroll, a particular titan named in the scroll appears in an unoccupied space on the ground or in water that you can see within 1 mile of yourself. The DM picks a suitable titan or determines it randomly by rolling on the table below (see the Monster Manual for the creature's stat block). The titan is Hostile toward all other creatures and disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points. If the titan is summoned into a space that isn't large enough to contain it, the summoning fails, and the scroll is wasted, 14100 Titan 01-15 Animal Lord 16-30 Blob of Annihilation 31-45 Colossus 46-60 Elemental Cataclysm 61-75 Empyrean 76-90 Kraken (a kraken requires a body of water large enough to contain it, or the summon- ing fails and the scroll is wasted) 91-00 Tarrasque Scimitar oF Spero # Senoing Stones SENDING STONES Wondrous Item, Uncommon Sending Stones come in pairs, with each stone carved to match the other so the pairing is easily recog- nized. While you touch one stone, you can cast Sending from it. The target is the bearer of the other stone. If no creature bears the other stone, you know that fact as soon as you use the stone, and you don't cast the spell. Once Sending is cast using either stone, the stones can't be used again until the next dawn. If one of the stones in a pair is destroyed, the other one becomes nonmagical. SENTINEL SHIELD Armor (Shield), Uncommon While holding this Shield, you have Advantage on Initiative rolls and Wisdom (Perception) checks. The Shield is emblazoned with a symbol of an eye. SHIELD, +1, +2, oR +3 Armor (Shield), Uncommon (+1), Rare (+2), or Very Rare (+3) While holding this Shield, you have a bonus to Ar- mor Class determined by the Shields rarity, in addi- tion to the Shield's normal bonus to AC. SHIELD OF EXPRESSION Armor (Shield), Common The front of this Shield is shaped in the likeness of a face. While bearing the Shield, you can take a Bonus Action to alter the face's expression. CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 303 SHIELD OF MISSILE ATTRACTION Armor (Shield), Rare (Requires Attunement) While holding this Shield, you have Resistance to damage from attacks made with Ranged weapons. Curse. This Shield is cursed. Attuning to it curses you until you are targeted by a Remove Curse spell or similar magic. Removing the Shield fails to end the curse on you. Whenever an attack with a Ranged weapon targets a creature within 10 feet of you, the curse causes you to become the target instead. SHIELD OF THE CAVALIER Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While holding this Shield, you have a +2 bonus to Armor Class. This bonus is in addition to the Shield's normal bonus to AC. The Shield has the following additional properties that you can use while holding it. Forceful Bash. When you take the Attack action, you can make one of the attack rolls using the Shield against a target within 5 feet of yourself. Apply your Proficiency Bonus and Strength mod- ifier to the attack roll. On a hit, the Shield deals Force damage to the target equal to 2d6 + 2 plus your Strength modifier, and if the target is a creature, you can push it up to 10 feet directly away from yourself. If the creature is your size or smaller, you can also knock it down, giving it the Prone condition. Swieco oF Missie ATTRACTION CHAPTER7 \| TREASURE SwieLO OF THE CAVALIER Protective Field. As a Reaction, when you or an ally you can see within 5 feet of you is targeted by an attack or makes a saving throw against an area of effect, you can use the Shield to create an immo- bile 5-foot Emanation originating from you. When the Emanation appears, any creatures or objects not fully contained within it are pushed into the nearest unoccupied spaces outside it. The attack or area of effect that triggered the Reaction has no effect on creatures and objects inside the Emanation, which lasts as long as you maintain Concentration, up to 1 minute. Nothing can pass into or out of the Ema- nation. A creature or object inside the Emanation can't be damaged by attacks or effects originating from outside, nor can a creature inside the Emana- tion damage anything outside it. Once this property is used, it can't be used again until the next dawn. # Silvered Weapon Weapon (Any Simple or Martial), Common An alchemical process has bonded silver to this magic weapon. When you score a Critical Hit with it against a creature that is shape-shifted, the weapon deals one additional die of damage. SLIPPERS OF SPIDER CLIMBING Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While you wear these light shoes, you can move up, down, and across vertical surfaces and along Sre..cuaro SwHie.o ceilings, while leaving your hands free. You have a Climb Speed equal to your Speed. However, the slip- pers don't allow you to move this way on a slippery surface, such as one covered by ice or oil. SMOLDERING ARMOR Armor (Any Heavy, Medium, or Light), Common Wisps of harmless, odorless smoke rise from this armor while it is worn. SOVEREIGN GLUE Wondrous Item, Legendary This viscous, milky-white substance can form a per- manent adhesive bond between any two objects. It must be stored in a jar or flask that has been coated inside with Oil of Slipperiness. When found, a con- tainer contains 1d6 + 1 ounces. One ounce of the glue can cover a 1-foot square surface. Applying an ounce of Sovereign Glue takes a Utilize action, and the applied glue takes 1 minute to set. Once it has done so, the bond it creates can be broken only by the application of Universal Solvent or Oil of Etherealness, or with a Wish spell. SPELLGUARD SHIELD Armor (Shield), Very Rare (Requires Attunement) While holding this Shield, you have Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects, and spell attack rolls have Disadvantage against you. Spee Scrou SPELL SCROLL Scroll, Rarity Varies A Spell Scroll bears the words of a single spell, writ- ten in a mystical cipher. If the spell is on your spell list, you can read the scroll and cast its spell without Material components. Otherwise, the scroll is unin- telligible. Casting the spell by reading the scroll requires the spell's normal casting time. Once the spell is cast, the scroll crumbles to dust. If the casting is interrupted, the scroll isn't lost. If the spell is on your spell list but of a higher level than you can normally cast, you make an ability check using your spellcasting ability to determine whether you cast the spell. The DC equals 10 plus the spell's level. On a failed check, the spell disap- pears from the scroll with no other effect. The level of the spell on the scroll determines the spell's saving throw DC and attack bonus, as well as the scroll's rarity, as shown in the following table. Spell Level Rarity SaveDC Attack Bonus Cantrip Common 13 +5 1 Common 13 +5 2 Uncommon 13 +5 3 Uncommon 15 +7 4 Rare 15 +7 5 Rare 7 +9 6 Very Rare V7 +9 7 Very Rare 18 +10 8 Very Rare 18 +10 9 Legendary 19 +11 S.iPPERS OF Spioer CrimBinG SOvEREIGN Give CHAPTER7\| TREASURE 305 306 # Sphere Of ANNIHILATION Copying a Scroll into a Spellbook. A Wizard spell on a Spell Scroll can be copied into a spellbook. When a spell is copied in this way, the copier must succeed on an Intelligence (Arcana) check with a DC equal to 10 plus the spell's level. On a successful check, the spell is copied. Whether the check suc- ceeds or fails, the Spell Scroll is destroyed. SPHERE OF ANNIHILATION Wondrous Item, Legendary This 2-foot-diameter black sphere is a hole in the multiverse, hovering in space and stabilized bya magical field surrounding it. The sphere obliterates all matter it passes through and all matter that passes through it. Artifacts are the exception. Unless an Artifact is susceptible to damage from a Sphere of Annihilation, it passes through the sphere unscathed. Anything else that touches the sphere but isn't wholly engulfed and obliterated by it takes 8d10 Force damage. Controlling the Sphere. A Sphere of Annihilation is stationary until someone takes control of it. If you are within 60 feet of a sphere, you can take a Magic action to make a DC 25 Intelligence (Arcana) check. On a successful check, you control the sphere until the start of your next turn, and if it was under an- other creature's control, that creature loses control # CHAPTER \| TREASURE | of the sphere. On a failed check, the sphere moves 10 feet toward you in a straight line. While in control of the sphere, you can take a Bonus Action to cause it to move in one direction of your choice, up to a number of feet equal to 5 times your Intelligence modifier (minimum 5 feet). Any creature whose space the sphere enters must succeed on a DC 19 Dexterity saving throw or be touched by it, taking 8d10 Force damage. A creature reduced to O Hit Points by this damage is obliterated, leaving its possessions behind but no other physical remains. Sphere Interactions. If the sphere comes into con- tact with a planar portal (such as that created by the Gate spell) or an extradimensional space (such as that within a Portable Hole), the DM determines randomly what happens using the following table. 1d100 Result 01-50 The sphere is destroyed. 51-85 The sphere moves through the portal or into the extradimensional space. 86-00 A spatial rift sends the sphere and each creature and object within 180 feet of the sphere to a random plane of existence, Spirit BOARD Wondrous Item, Very Rare This ornate wooden board has the letters of the Common alphabet printed on one side, alongside the words "Yes" and "No" and symbols representing "Weal" and "Woe." The board comes with a heart- shaped, wooden planchette. This planchette must be resting on the lettered side of the board for the board's magic to function. This board has 3 charges and regains \| expended charge daily at dawn. While touching the planch- ette, you can take 1 minute to cast one of the spells on the table below. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. As you cast the spell, you call on the spirits of the dead to guide the planchette across the board's surface, answering your questions by pointing to the letters or words on the board. Spell Charge Cost Augury \] Commune 3 STAFF OF ADORNMENT Staff, Common If you place a Tiny object weighing no more than 1 pound (such as a shard of crystal, an egg, or a stone) above the tip of this staff while holding it, the object Srarr oF CHARMING floats an inch from the staff's tip and remains there until it is removed or until the staff is no longer in your possession. The staff can have up to three such objects floating over its tip at any given time. While holding the staff, you can make one or more of the objects slowly spin or turn in place. STAFF OF BIRDCALLS Staff, Common This wooden staff is decorated with bird carvings. It has 10 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend \| charge from the staff and cause it to create one of the following sounds, which can be heard out to 120 feet: a finch's chirp, a ra- ven's caw, a duck's quack, a chicken's cluck, a goose's honk, a loon's call, a turkey's gobble, a seagull's cry, an owl's hoot, or an eagle's shriek. Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the staff explodes in a harmless cloud of bird feathers and is lost forever. STAFF OF CHARMING Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Bard, Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) This staff has 10 charges. While holding the staff, you can use any of its properties: Cast Spell. You can expend 1 of the staff's charges to cast Charm Person, Command, or Comprehend Languages from it using your spell save DC. Reflect Enchantment. If you succeed on a saving throw against an Enchantment spell that targets only you, you can take a Reaction to expend 1 charge from the staff and turn the spell back on its caster as if you had cast the spell. Resist Enchantment. If you fail a saving throw against an Enchantment spell that targets only you, you can turn your failed save into a success- ful one. You can't use this property of the staff again until the next dawn. Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d8 + 2 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the staff crumbles to dust and is destroyed. RAE ew a a eo Srarr or Fire Seiair Boaro STAFF OF FIRE Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) You have Resistance to Fire damage while you hold this staff. Spells. The staff has 10 charges. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spell save DC. The table in- dicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Charge Charge Spell Cost Spell Cost Burning Hands 1 Wall of Fire 4 Fireball 3 Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the staff crumbles into cinders and is destroyed. # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 307 oo ---\_------\_\_---\_---- --- \> STAFF OF FLOWERS Staff, Common This wooden staff has 10 charges. While holding it, you can take a Magic action to expend 1 charge from the staff and cause a flower to sprout from a patch of earth or soil within 5 feet of yourself, or from the staff itself. Unless you choose a specific kind of flower, the staff creates a mild-scented daisy. The flower is harmless and nonmagical, and it grows or withers as a normal flower would. Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a1, the staff turns into flower petals and is lost forever. Se --- ------ ---\_\_\_\_---\_------ --- ---\~\< --------- STAFF OF FROST Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) You have Resistance to Cold damage while you hold this staff. Spells, The staff has 10 charges. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spell save DC. The table in- dicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Charge Charge Spell Cost Spell Cost Cone of Cold 5 Ice Storm 4 Fog Cloud 1 Wall of Ice a Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a1, the staff turns to water and is destroyed. eo STAFF OF HEALING Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Bard, Cleric, or Druid) This staff has 10 charges. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spellcasting ability modifier. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Cure Wounds 1 charge per spell level (maximum 4 fora level 4 spell) Lesser Restoration 2 Mass Cure Wounds 5 Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a1, the staff vanishes in a flash of light, lost forever. # Staff Of Power Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement by a Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) This staff has 20 charges and can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff that grants a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. While hold- ing it, you gain a +2 bonus to Armor Class, saving throws, and spell attack rolls. Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spell save DC. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Cone of Cold Fireball (level 5 version) Globe of Invulnerability Hold Monster Levitate Lightning Bolt (level 5 version) Magic Missile Ray of Enfeeblement Wall of Force ---\_-- un uvrnwmnu uw Regaining Charges. The staff regains 2d8 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a, the staff retains its +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls but loses all other properties. On a 20, the staff regains 1d8 + 2 charges. Retributive Strike. You can take a Magic action to break the staff over your knee or against a solid surface. The staff is destroyed and releases its magic in an explosion that fills a 30-foot Emanation originating from itself. You have a 50 percent chance to instantly travel to a random plane of existence, avoiding the explosion. If you fail to avoid the effect, you take Force damage equal to 16 times the num- ber of charges in the staff. Each other creature in the area makes a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes Force damage equal to 4 times the number of charges in the staff. On a suc- cessful save, a creature takes half as much damage. CHAPTER \| TREASURE San --------- ne agrEnNESEETErEan es ae ' Sobeaidian i eet ha STAFF OF STRIKING Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This staff can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff that grants a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. The staff has 10 charges. When you hit with a melee attack using it, you can expend up to 3 charges. For each charge you expend, the target takes an extra 1d6 Force damage. Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the staff becomes a non- magical Quarterstaff. STAFF OF SWARMING INSECTS Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Bard, Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) This staff has 10 charges. Insect Cloud. While holding the staff, you can take a Magic action and expend 1 charge to cause a swarm of harmless flying insects to fill a 30-foot Emanation originating from you. The insects re- main for 10 minutes, making the area Heavily Ob- scured for creatures other than you. A strong wind (like that created by Gust of Wind) disperses the swarm and ends the effect. Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spell save DC and spell attack modifier. The table in- dicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Giant Insect 4 Insect Plague 5 Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 + 4 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, a swarm of insects con- sumes and destroys the staff, then disperses. STAFF OF THE ADDER Staff, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) As a Bonus Action, you can turn the head of this staff into that of an animate, venomous snake for 1 minute or revert the staff to its inanimate form. When you take the Attack action, you can make one of the attack rolls using the animated snake head, which has a reach of 5 feet. Apply your Pro- ficiency Bonus and Wisdom modifier to the attack roll. On a hit, the target takes 1d6 Piercing damage and 3d6 Poison damage. Srarr or SwarRMinGc Insecrs Srarr or MEALING # CHAPTER \| TREASURE 309 The snake head can be attacked while it is ani- mate. It has AC 15, HP 20, and Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage. If the head drops to 0 Hit Points, the staff is destroyed. As long as it's not de- stroyed, the staff regains all lost Hit Points when it reverts to its inanimate form. # Staff Of The Magi Staff, Legendary (Requires Attunement by a Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wizard) This staff has 50 charges and can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff that grants a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. While you hold it, you gain a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls. Spell Absorption. While holding the staff, you have Advantage on saving throws against spells. In addition, you can take a Reaction when another creature casts a spell that targets only you. If you do, the staff absorbs the magic of the spell, cancel- ing its effect and gaining a number of charges equal to the absorbed spell's level. However, if doing so brings the staff's total number of charges above 50, the staff explodes as if you activated its Retributive Strike (see below). Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spell save DC. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Arcane Lock 0 Conjure Elemental Detect Magic Dispel Magic Enlarge/Reduce Fireball (level 7 version) Flaming Sphere Ice Storm Invisibility Knock Light Lightning Bolt (level 7 version) Mage Hand Passwall Plane Shift Protection from Evil and Good Telekinesis Wall of Fire Web no &+ UMUON VU ON O NN FF NY NSN CO WwW SO # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Srarr or THe ApoeR Srarr oF THE PyTHON # Staff Of The WooodLanods Regaining Charges. The staff regains 4d6 + 2 ex- pended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 20, the staff regains 1d12 + 1 charges. Retributive Strike. You can take a Magic action to break the staff over your knee or against a solid surface, The staff is destroyed and releases its magic in an explosion that fills a 30-foot Emanation originating from itself. You have a 50 percent chance to instantly travel to a random plane of existence, avoiding the explosion. If you fail to avoid the effect, you take Force damage equal to 16 times the num- ber of charges in the staff. Each other creature in the area makes a DC 17 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes Force damage equal to 6 times the number of charges in the staff. On a suc- cessful save, a creature takes half as much damage. STAFF OF THE PYTHON Staff; Uncommon (Requires Attunement) As a Magic action, you can throw this staff so that it lands in an unoccupied space within 10 feet of you, causing the staff to become a Giant Constrictor Snake in that space. The snake is under your con- trol and shares your Initiative count, taking its turn immediately after yours. On your turn, you can mentally command the snake (no action required) if it is within 60 feet of you and you don't have the Incapacitated condition. You decide what action the snake takes and where it moves during its turn, or you can issue it a general command, such as to attack your enemies or guard a location. Absent commands from you, the snake defends itself. As a Bonus Action, you can command the snake to revert to staff form in its current space, and you can't use the staff's property again for 1 hour. If the snake is reduced to 0 Hit Points, it dies and re- verts to its staff form; the staff then shatters and is destroyed. If the snake reverts to staff form before losing all its Hit Points, it regains all of them. STAFF OF THE WOODLANDS Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement by a Druid) This staff has 6 charges and can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff that grants a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. While holding it, you have a +2 bonus to spell attack rolls. Spells. While holding the staff, you can cast one of the spells on the following table from it, using your spell save DC. The table indicates how many charges you must expend to cast the spell. Spell Charge Cost Animal Friendship 1 Awaken Barkskin Locate Animals or Plants Pass without Trace Speak with Animals Speak with Plants Wall of Thorns Dawe HNN Mw Tree Form. You can take a Magic action to plant one end of the staff in earth in an unoccupied space and expend 1 charge to transform the staff into a healthy tree. The tree is 60 feet tall and has a 5-foot-diameter trunk, and its branches at the top spread out in a 20-foot radius. The tree appears ordinary but radiates a faint aura of Transmutation magic that can be discerned with the Detect Magic spell. While touching the tree and using a Magic action, you return the staff to its normal form. Any creature in the tree falls when the tree reverts to a staff. Regaining Charges. The staff regains 1d6 expended charges daily at dawn. If you expend the last charge, roll 1d20. On a 1, the staff loses its properties and becomes a nonmagical Quarterstaff. a - See = ------ STAFF OF THUNDER AND LIGHTNING Staff, Very Rare (Requires Attunement) This staff can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff that grants a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with it. It also has the following addi- tional properties. Once one of these properties is used, it can't be used again until the next dawn. Lightning. When you hit with a melee attack using the staff, you can cause the target to take an extra 2d6 Lightning damage (no action required). Thunder. When you hit with a melee attack using the staff, you can cause the staff to emit a crack of thunder audible out to 300 feet (no action re- \| quired). The target you hit must succeed on a DC 17 Constitution saving throw or have the Stunned condition until the end of your next turn. Thunder and Lightning. Immediately after you hit with a melee attack using the staff, you can take a Bonus Action to use the Lightning and Thunder properties (see above) at the same time. Doing so doesn't expend the daily use of those properties, only the use of this one. Lightning Strike. You can take a Magic ac- tion to cause a bolt of lightning to leap from the staff's tip in a Line that is 5 feet wide and 120 feet long. Each creature in that Line makes a DC 17 # CHAPTER \| TREASURE emt eae 312 Srone or Gooo Lucx Dexterity saving throw, taking 9d6 Lightning dam- age on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Thunderclap. You can take a Magic action to cause the staff to produce a thunderclap audible out to 600 feet. Every creature within a 60-foot Emanation originating from you makes a DC 17 Con- stitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 2d6 Thunder damage and has the Deafened condition for 1 minute. On a successful save, a crea- ture takes half as much damage only. STAFF OF WITHERING Staff, Rare (Requires Attunement) This staff has 3 charges and regains 1d3 expended charges daily at dawn. The staff can be wielded as a magic Quarterstaff. On a hit, it deals damage as a normal Quarterstaff, and you can expend 1 charge to deal an extra 2d10 Necrotic damage to the target and force it to make a DC 15 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the target has Disadvantage for 1 hour on any ability check or saving throw that uses Strength or Constitution. # Stone Of Controlling Earth Elementals Wondrous Item, Rare While touching this 5-pound stone to the ground, you can take a Magic action to summon an Earth Elemental. The elemental appears in an unoccupied # CHAPTER \| TREASURE Sraere of THuNoeR AND LIGHTNING " Srarr or WiTHeRING space you choose within 30 feet of yourself, obeys your commands, and takes its turn immediately after you on your Initiative count. The elemental disappears after 1 hour, when it dies, or when you dismiss it as a Bonus Action. The stone can't be used this way again until the next dawn. STONE oF Goop Luck (LucKsTONE) Wondrous Item, Uncommon (Requires Attunement) While this polished agate is on your person, you gain a +1 bonus to ability checks and saving throws. SUN BLADE Weapon (Longsword), Rare (Requires Attunement) This item appears to be a sword hilt. Blade of Radiance. While grasping the hilt, you can take a Bonus Action to cause a blade of pure radiance to spring into existence or make the blade disappear. While the blade exists, this magic weapon functions as a Longsword with the Finesse property. If you are proficient with Longswords or Shortswords, you are proficient with the Sun Blade. You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this weapon, which deals Radiant damage instead of Slashing damage. When you hit an Undead with it, that target takes an extra 1d8 Radiant damage. Sunlight. The sword's luminous blade emits Bright Light in a 15-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi- tional 15 feet. The light is sunlight. While the blade persists, you can take a Magic action to expand or reduce its radius of Bright Light and Dim Light by 5 feet each, to a maximum of 30 feet each or a mini- mum of 10 feet each. SworD OF ANSWERING Weapon (Longsword), Legendary (Requires Attunement) You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with this sword. In addition, while you hold the sword, you can take a Reaction to make one me- lee attack with it against any creature in your reach that deals damage to you. You have Advantage on the attack roll, and any damage dealt with this spe- cial attack ignores any Immunity or Resistance the target has to that damage. Sworp oF Kas Weapon (Longsword), Artifact (Requires Attunement) Kas was a powerful warrior who served Vecna and whose loyalty was rewarded with this sword. As Kas's power grew, so did his hubris. The sword urged Kas to destroy Vecna and usurp his throne. Legend says Vecna's destruction came at Kas's hand, but Vecna also wrought his rebellious lieutenant's doom, leaving only Kas's sword behind. Bloodthirst. The sword thirsts for blood. If the sword doesn't taste blood on its blade within 1 min- ute of being drawn from its scabbard, its wielder makes a DC 15 Charisma saving throw. On a suc- cessful save, the wielder takes 3d6 Psychic damage. On a failed save, the wielder is dominated by the sword, as if by the Dominate Monster spell, and the sword demands blood. The spell effect ends when the sword's demand is met. Magic Weapon. You gain a +3 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls made with the sword, which scores a Critical Hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20 and deals an extra 2d10 Slashing damage to Undead. SuNBLADE Random Properties. The sword has the following random properties (see "Artifacts" in this chapter): - I minor beneficial property - 1 major beneficial property - 1 minor detrimental property - 1 major detrimental property Spells. While the sword is on your person, you can cast the following spells (save DC 18) from it: - Call Lightning - Divine Word - Finger of Death Once you use the sword to cast a spell, you can't cast that spell again from it until the next dawn. Spirit of Kas. While the sword is on your person, you gain the following benefits: Battle Hunger. You add 1d10 to your Initiative rolls. Blade of Defense. When you take an action to at- tack with the sword, you can transfer some or all of its attack bonus to your Armor Class instead. The adjusted bonuses remain in effect until the start of your next turn. Necrotic Resistance. You have Resistance to Necrotic damage. Sentience. The Sword of Kas is a sentient Chaotic Evil weapon with an Intelligence of 15, a Wisdom of 13, and a Charisma of 16. It has hearing and Darkvi- sion out to 120 feet. The weapon communicates telepathically with its wielder and speaks Common. Personality. The sword's purpose is to bring ruin to Vecna. Killing Vecna's worshipers, destroying the lich's works, and foiling his machinations all help to fulfill this goal.