# CHAPTER \| SPELLS # Conjure Celestial Level 7 Conjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You conjure a spirit from the Upper Planes, which manifests as a pillar of light in a 10-foot-radius, 40-foot-high Cylinder centered on a point within range. For each creature you can see in the Cylin- der, choose which of these lights shines on it: Healing Light. The target regains Hit Points equal to 4d12 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Searing Light. The target makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 6d12 Radiant damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Until the spell ends, Bright Light fills the Cylinder, and when you move on your turn, you can also move the Cylinder up to 30 feet. Whenever the Cylinder moves into the space of a creature you can see and whenever a creature you can see enters the Cylinder or ends its turn there, you can bathe it in one of the lights. A creature can be affected by this spell only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing and damage increase by 1d12 for each spell slot level above 7. ConJURE ELEMENTAL Level 5 Conjuration (Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You conjure a Large, intangible spirit from the Ele- mental Planes that appears in an unoccupied space within range. Choose the spirit's element, which determines its damage type: air (Lightning), earth (Thunder), fire (Fire), or water (Cold). The spirit lasts for the duration. Whenever a creature you can see enters the spirit's space or starts its turn within 5 feet of the spirit, you can force that creature to make a Dex- terity saving throw if the spirit has no creature Restrained. On failed save, the target takes 8d8 damage of the spirit's type, and the target has the Restrained condition until the sp start of each of its turns, the R peats the save. On a failed save, damage of the spirit's type. On a target isn't Restrained by the sp +i. Using a Higher-Level Speil Sict, i". damage in- creases by 2d8 for each spell slo!!ve! above 5. ---- CONJURE © EY Level 6 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: v,S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You conjure a Medium spirit from the Feywild in an unoccupied space you can see within range. The spirit lasts for the duration, and it looks like a Fey creature of your choice. When the spirit appears, you can make one melee spell attack against a crea- ture within 5 feet of it. On a hit, the target takes Psychic damage equal to 3d12 plus your spellcasting ability modifier, and the target has the Frightened condition until the start of your next turn, with both you and the spirit as the source of the fear. As a Bonus Action on your later turns, you can teleport the spirit to an unoccupied space you can see within 30 feet of the space it left and make the attack against a creature within 5 feet of it. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 2d12 for each spell slot level above 6. ConyuRE MINOR ELEMENTALS Level 4 Conjuration (Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You conjure spirits from the Elemental Planes that flit around you in a 15-foot Emanation for the dura- tion. Until the spell ends, any attack you make deals an extra 2d8 damage when you hit a creature in the Emanation. This damage is Acid, Cold, Fire, or Lightning (your choice when you make the attack). In addition, the ground in the Emanation is Diffi- cult Terrain for your enemies. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 2d8 for each spell slot level above 4. oo eed e --- CoNJURE VOLLEY Level 5 Conjuration (Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a Melee or Ranged weapon worth at least 1 CP) Duration: Instantaneous You brandish the weapon used to cast th choose a point within range. H 40-£ that p ture takes 8d8 Force damage on a failed save or half ire of your choice that you can see ina dius, 20-foot-high Cylinder centered on it makes a Dexterity saving throw. A crea- as much damage ona successful one. Conjure WoopLanp BEINGS Level 4 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You conjure nature spirits that flit around you ina 10-foot Emanation for the duration. Whenever the Emanation enters the space of a creature you can see and whenever a creature you can see enters the Emanation or ends its turn there, you can force that creature to make a Wisdom saving throw. The crea- ture takes 5d8 Force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature makes this save only once per turn. In addition, you can take the Disengage action as a i Bonus Action for the spell's duration. a Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 5. --- - \| Contact OTHER PLANE i Level 5 Divination (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Self Components: V Duration: 1 minute You mentally contact a demigod, the spirit of a long-dead sage, or some other knowledgeable entity from another plane. Contacting this otherworldly intelligence can break your mind. When you cast this spell, make a DC 15 Intelligence saving throw. Ona successful save, you can ask the entity up to five questions. You must ask your questions before the spell ends. The DM answers each questio one word, such as "yes," "no," "maybe," "neve relevant," or "unclear" (if the entity doesn't kn: the answer to the question). If a one-word a1 would be misleading, the DM might instead short phrase as an answer. On a failed save, you take 6d6 Psychic di and have t! ition 1 Lor CONTAGION Level 5 Necromancy (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Component: V, S Duration: 7 days Your touch inflicts a magical contagion. The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 11d8 Necrotic damage and have the Poisoned condition. Also, choose one ability when you cast the spell. While Poisoned, the target has Disadvan- tage on saving throws made with the chosen ability. The target must repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns until it gets three successes or failures. If the target succeeds on three of these saves, the spell ends on the target. If the target fails three of the saves, the spell lasts for 7 days on it. Whenever the Poisoned target receives an effect that would end the Poisoned condition, the target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw, or the Poisoned condition doesn't end on it. CONTINGENCY Level 6 Abjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a gem-encrusted statuette of yourself worth 1,500+ GP) Duration: 10 days Choose a spell of level 5 or lower that you can cast, that has a casting time of an action, and that can target you. You cast that spell---called the contin- gent spell---as part of casting Contingency, expending spell slots for both, but the contingent spell doesn't come into effect. Instead, it takes effect when a cer- tain trigger occurs. You describe that trigger when you cast the two spells. For example, a Contingency cast with Water Breathing might stipulate that Water Breathing comes into effect when you are engulfed in water or a similar liquid. The contingent spell takes effect immediately af- ter the trigger occurs for the first time, whether or not you want it to, and then Contingency ends. The contingent spell takes effect only on you, even if it can normally target others. You can use only one Contingency spell at a time. If you cast this spell again, the effect of another Contingency spell on you ends. Also, Contingency ends on you if its material component is ever not on your person. CONTINUAL FLAME Level 2 Evocation (Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (ruby dust worth 50+ Gp, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled A flame springs from an object that you touch, The effect casts Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. It looks like a regular flame, but it creates no heat and consumes no fuel. The flame can be covered or hidden but not smothered or quenched. CONTROL WATER Level 4 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 300 feet Components: V, S, M (a mixture of water and dust) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes Until the spell ends, you control any water inside an area you choose that is a Cube up to 100 feet ona side, using one of the following effects. As a Magic action on your later turns, you can repeat the same effect or choose a different one. Flood. You cause the water level of all standing water in the area to rise by as much as 20 feet. If you choose an area in a large body of water, you instead create a 20-foot tall wave that travels from one side of the area to the other and then crashes, Any Huge or smaller vehicles in the wave's path are carried with it to the other side. Any Huge or smaller vehicles struck by the wave have a 25 per- cent chance of capsizing. The water level remains elevated until the spell ends or you choose a different effect. If this effect produced a wave, the wave repeats on the start of your next turn while the flood effect lasts. Part Water. You part water in the area and cre- ate a trench. The trench extends across the spell's area, and the separated water forms a wall to either side. The trench remains until the spell ends or you choose a different effect. The water then slowly fills in the trench over the course of the next round un- til the normal water level is restored. Redirect Flow. You cause flowing water in the area to move in a direction you choose, even if the wa- ter has to flow over obstacles, up walls, or in other unlikely directions. The water in the area moves as you direct it, but once it moves beyond the spell's area, it resumes its flow based on the terrain. The water continues to move in the direction you chose until the spell ends or you choose a different effect. Whirlpool. You cause a whirlpool to form in the center of the area, which must be at least 50 feet square and 25 feet deep. The whirlpool lasts until you choose a different effect or the spell ends. The whirlpool is 5 feet wide at the base, up to 50 feet wide at the top, and 25 feet tall. Any creature in the water and within 25 feet of the whirlpool is pulled 10 feet toward it. When a creature enters the whirlpool for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there, it makes a Strength saving throw. Ona failed save, the creature takes 2d8 Bludgeoning damage. Ona successful save, the creature takes half as much damage. A creature can swim away from the whirlpool only if it first takes an action to pull away and succeeds on a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC, CONTROL WEATHER Level 8 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Self Components: V, S, M (burning incense) Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours You take contro! of the weather within 5 miles of you for the duration. You must be outdoors to cast this spell, and it ends early if you go indoors. When you cas' the spell, you change the current weather conditions, which are determined by the A BRASS ORAGON CASTS ConrRoL WEATHER TO SAVE A COMMUNITY FROM A # Destructive Storm DM. You can change precipitation, temperature, and wind. It takes 1d4 = 10 minutes for the new conditions to take effect. Once they do so, you can change the conditions again. When the spell ends, the weather gradually returns to normal. When you change the weather conditions, find a current condition on the following tables and change its stage by one, up or down. When changing the wind, you can change its direction. PRECIPITATION Stage Condition Clear 2 Light clouds 3 Overcast or ground fog 4 Rain, hail, or snow 5 Torrential rain, driving hail, or blizzard TEMPERATURE Wind Stage Condition Stage Condition 1 Heat wave 1 Calm 2 Hot 2 Moderate wind 3. Warm 3 Strong wind 4 Cool 4 Gale 5 Cold 5 Storm 6 Freezing -\* \| a. # CHAPTER\|SPELLS { 257 \_ Corpon OF ARROWS Level 2 Transmutation (Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch: Components: V, S, M (an ornamental braid) Duration: 8 hours You touch up to four nonmagical Arrows or Bolts and plant them in the ground in your space. Until the spell ends, the ammunition can't be physically uprooted, and whenever a creature other than you enters a space within 30 feet of the ammunition for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there, one piece of ammunition flies up to strike it. The crea- ture must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 2d4 Piercing damage. The piece of ammunition is then destroyed. The spell ends when none of the ammunition remains planted in the ground. When you cast this spell, you can designate any creatures you choose, and the spell ignores them. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The amount of am- munition that can be affected increases by two for each spell slot level above 2. COUNTERSPELL Level 3 Abjuration (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Reaction, which you take when you see a creature within 60 feet of yourself casting a spell with Verbal, Somatic, or Material components Range: 60 feet Components: S Duration: Instantaneous You attempt to interrupt a creature in the process of casting a spell. The creature makes a Constitu- tion saving throw. On a failed save, the spell dissi- pates with no effect, and the action, Bonus Action, or Reaction used to cast it is wasted. If that spell was cast with a spell slot, the slot isn't expended. CREATE Foop AND WATER Level 3 Conjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You create 45 pounds of food and 30 gallons of fresh water on the ground or in containers within range---both useful in fending off the hazards of malnutrition and dehydration. The food is bland but nourishing and looks like a food of your choice, and the water is clean. The food spoils after 24 hours if uneaten. CREATE OR DESTROY WATER Level 1 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a mix of water and sand) Duration: Instantaneous You do one of the following: Create Water. You create up to 10 gallons of clean water within range in an open container. Alter- natively, the water falls as rain in a 30-foot Cube within range, extinguishing exposed flames there, Destroy Water. You destroy up to 10 gallons of water in an open container within range. Alter- natively, you destroy fog in a 30-foot Cube within range. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You create or de- stroy 10 additional gallons of water, or the size of the Cube increases by 5 feet, for each spell slot level above 1. CREATE UNDEAD Level 6 Necromancy (Cleric, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 10 feet Components: V, S, M (one 150+ GP black onyx stone for each corpse) Duration: Instantaneous You can cast this spell only at night. Choose up to three corpses of Medium or Small Humanoids within range. Each one becomes a Ghoul under your control (see the Monster Manual for its stat block). Asa Bonus Action on each of your turns, you can mentally command any creature you animated with this spell if the creature is within 120 feet of you (if you control multiple creatures, you can command any of them at the same time, issuing the same com- mand to them). You decide what action the creature will take and where it will move on its next turn, or you can issue a general command, such as to guard a particular place. If you issue no commands, the creature takes the Dodge action and moves only to avoid harm. Once given an order, the creature con- tinues to follow the order until its task is complete. The creature is under your control for 24 hours, after which it stops obeying any command you've given it. To maintain control of the creature for another 24 hours, you must cast this spell on the creature before the curren 24-hour period ends. This use of the spell reasseris your control over up to three creatures you hav snimated with this spell rather than animating new ones. Using a Hizher-Level Spell Slot. If you use a level 7 spell slot, you can animate or reassert control over four Ghouls. If you use a level 8 spell slot, you can animate or reassert control over five Ghouls or two Ghasts or Wights. If you use a level 9 spell slot, you can animate or reassert control over six Ghouls, three Ghasts or Wights, or two Mummies. See the Monster Manual for these stat blocks. CREATION Level 5 Illusion (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a paintbrush) Duration: Special You pull wisps of shadow material from the Shad- owfell to create an object within range. It is either an object of vegetable matter (soft goods, rope, wood, and the like) or mineral matter (stone, crys- tal, metal, and the like). The object must be no larger than a 5-foot Cube, and the object must be of a form and material that you have seen. The spell's duration depends on the object's ma- terial, as shown in the Materials table. If the object is composed of multiple materials, use the shortest duration. Using any object created by this spell as another spell's Material component causes the other spell to fail. MATERIALS Material Duration Vegetable matter 24 hours Stone or crystal 12 hours Precious metals 1 hour Gems 10 minutes Adamantine or mithral 1 minute Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Cube increases by 5 feet for each spell slot level above 5. CROWN OF MADNESS Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute One creature that you can see within range must succeed on 2 Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. The creature succeeds automatically if it isn't Humanoid. A spectral crown appears on the Charmed target's head, and it must use its action before moving on ioe \| each of its turns to make a melee attack against a creature other than itself that you mentally choose. The target can act normally on its turn if you choose no creature or if no creature is within its Teach. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the spell on itself on a success. On your later turns, you must take the Magic ac- tion to maintain control of the target, or the spell ends. # Crusader's Mantle Level 3 Evocation (Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You radiate a magical aura in a 30-foot Emanation. While in the aura, you and your allies each deal an extra 1d4 Radiant damage when hitting with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike. Cure WounpDs Level 1 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A creature you touch regains a number of Hit Points equal to 2d8 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing in- creases by 2d8 for each spell slot level above 1. # Dancing Lights Illusion Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of phosphorus) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create up to four torch-size lights within range, making them appear as torches, lanterns, or glow- ing orbs that hover for the duration. Alternatively, you combine the four lights into one glowing Me- dium form that is vaguely humanlike. Whichever form you choose, each light sheds Dim Light ina 10-foot radius. Asa Bonus Action, you can move the lights up to 60 feet to a space within range. A light must be within 20 feet of another light created by this spell, and a light vanishes if it exceeds the spell's range.; CHAPTER \| SPELLS 4 259 # An Elf Cleric Uses The Spell Daylight To Bring The Light OF DAWN TO A VAMPIRE COURT. \~ \|. DARKNESS Level 2 Evocation (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, M (bat fur and a piece of coal) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes For the duration, magical Darkness spreads from a point within range and fills a 15-foot-radius Sphere. Darkvision can't see through it, and nonmagical light can't illuminate it. Alternatively, you cast the spell on an object that isn't being worn or carried, causing the Darkness to fill a 15-foot Emanation originating from that object. Covering that object with something opaque, such as a bowl or helm, blocks the Darkness. If any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of Bright Light or Dim Light created by a spell of level 2 or lower, that other spell is dispelled. CHAPTER \| SPELLS DARKVISION Level 2 Transmutation (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a dried carrot) Duration: 8 hours For the duration, a willing creature you touch has Darkvision with a range of 150 feet. DAYLIGHT Level 3 Evocation (Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour For the duration, sunlight spreads from a point within range and fills a 60-foot-radius Sphere. The sunlight's area is Bright Light and sheds Dim Light for an additional 60 feet. Alternatively, you cast the spell on an object that isn't being worn or carried, causing the sunlight to fill a 60-foot Emanation originating from that ob- ject. Covering that object with something opaque, such as a bowl or helm, blocks the sunlight. If any of this spell's area overlaps with an area of Darkness created by a spell of level 3 or lower, that other spell is dispelled. # Death Ward Level 4 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: 8 hours You touch a creature and grant it a measure of pro- tection from death. The first time the target would drop to O Hit Points before the spell ends, the target instead drops to 1 Hit Point, and the spell ends. If the spell is still in effect when the target is sub- jected to an effect that would kill it instantly with- out dealing damage, that effect is negated against the target, and the spell ends. DELAYED BLAST FIREBALL Level 7 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a ball of bat guano and sulfur) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A beam of yellow light flashes from you, then con- denses at a chosen point within range as a glowing bead for the duration. When the spell ends, the bead explodes, and each creature in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point makes a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes Fire damage equal to the total accumulated damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. The spell's base damage is 12d6, and the damage increases by 1d6 whenever your turn ends and the spell hasn't ended. If a creature touches the glowing bead before the spell ends, that creature makes a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the spell ends, causing the bead to explode. On a successful save, the creature can throw the bead up to 40 feet. If the thrown bead enters a creature's space or collides with a solid object, the spell ends, and the bead explodes. When the bead explodes, flammable objects in the explosion that aren't being worn or carried start burning. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The base damage increases by id6 for each spell slot level above 7. DEMIPLANE Level 8 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: S Duration: 1 hour You create a shadowy Medium door on a flat solid surface that you can see within range. This door can be opened and closed, and it leads to a demi- plane that is an empty room 30 feet in each dimen- sion, made of wood or stone (your choice). When the spell ends, the door vanishes, and any objects inside the demiplane remain there. Any creatures inside also remain unless they opt to be shunted through the door as it vanishes, landing with the Prone condition in the unoccupied spaces closest to the door's former space. Each time you cast this spell, you can create a new demiplane or connect the shadowy door to a demiplane you created with a previous casting of this spell. Additionally, if you know the nature and contents of a demiplane created by a casting of this spell by another creature, you can connect the shadowy door to that demiplane instead. DESTRUCTIVE WAVE Level 5 Evocation (Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Instantaneous Destructive energy ripples outward from you ina 30-foot Emanation. Each creature you choose in the Emanation makes a Constitution saving throw. Ona failed save, a target takes 5d6 Thunder damage and Sd6 Radiant or Necrotic damage (your choice) and has the Prone condition. On a successful save, a target takes half as much damage only. # Detect Evil And Good Level 1 Divination (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes For the duration, you sense the location of any Ab- erration, Celestial, Elemental, Fey, Fiend, or Undead within 30 feet of yourself. You also sense whether the Hallow spell is active there and, if so, where. The spell is blocked by 1 foot of stone, dirt, or wood; \| inch of metal; or a thin sheet of lead. --- \~ CHAPTER \| SPELLS Loonall DeTEcT MaGic Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S; Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes wood; 1 inch of metal; or a thin sheet of lead. # Detect Poison And Disease Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a yew leaf) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes # Detect Thoughts Level 2 Divination (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (1 Copper Piece) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute tion on your later turns. Sense Thoughts. You sense the presence of thinking creature is present. wood; \| inch of metal; or a thin sheet of lead. Level 1 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger, For the duration, you sense the presence of magical effects within 30 feet of yourself. If you sense such effects, you can take the Magic action to see a faint aura around any visible creature or object in the area that bears the magic, and if an effect was cre- ated by a spell, you learn the spell's school of magic. The spell is blocked by 1 foot of stone, dirt, or Level 1 Divination (Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) For the duration, you sense the location of poisons, poisonous or venomous creatures, and magical 7 i contagions within 30 feet of yourself. You sense the \| kind of poison, creature, or contagion in each case. ( The spell is blocked by 1 foot of stone, dirt, or wood; 1 inch of metal; or a thin sheet of lead. You activate one of the effects below. Until the spell ends, you can activate either effect as a Magic ac- thoughts within 30 feet of yourself that belong to creatures that know languages or are telepathic. You don't read the thoughts, but you know that a The spell is blocked by 1 foot of stone, dirt, or throug! Asa Magic action on your next torn, you can try to probe deeper into the target's mind. IF you probe deeper, the target makes a Wisdom saving throw, On a failed save, you discern the target's reasoning emotions, and something that looms large inits --- mind (such as a worry, love, or hate). On a success- ful save, the spell ends. Either way, the target knows that you are probing into its mind, and until you shift your attention away from the target's mind, the target can take an action on its turn to make an Intelligence (Arcana) check against your spell save DC, ending the spell on a success. # Dimension Door Level 4 Conjuration (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 500 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You teleport to a location within range. You arrive at exactly the spot desired. It can be a place you can see, one you can visualize, or one you can describe by stating distance and direction, such as "200 feet straight downward" or "300 feet upward to the northwest at a 45-degree angle." You can also teleport one willing creature. The creature must be within 5 feet of you when you teleport, and it teleports to a space within 5 feet of your destination space. If you, the other creature, or both would arrive in a space occupied by a creature or completely filled by one or more objects, you and any creature tray- eling with you each take 4d6 Force damage, and the teleportation fails. DISGUISE SELF Level \| Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour You make yourself---including your clothing, armor, weapons, and other belongings on your person--- look different until the spell ends. You can seem 1 foot shorter or taller and can appear heavier or lighter. You must adopt a form that has the same basic arrangement of limbs as you have. Otherwise, the extent of the illusion is up to you. \| The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up to physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell to add a hat to your outfit, objects pass To discern that you are disguised, a creature must take the Study action to inspect your appearance and succeed on an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. DISINTEGRATE Level 6 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a lodestone and dust) Duration: Instantaneous You launch a green ray at a target you can see within range. The target can be a creature, a non- magical object, or a creation of magical force, such as the wall created by Wall of Force. A creature targeted by this spell makes a Dexter- ity saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes 10d6 + 40 Force damage. If this damage reduces it to 0 Hit Points, it and everything nonmagical it is wearing and carrying are disintegrated into gray dust. The target can be revived only by a True Resur- rection or a Wish spell. This spell aviomatically disintegrates a Large or smaller nonmagical object or a creation of magical force. If such » target is Huge or larger, this spell disintegrates » i0-foot-Cube portion of it. Using a Hig': r-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 3:'( for each spell slot level above 6. A THEFLING CLeric casts Disper Evin ANO Good To EXPEL AN Evit SPIRIT # From A Possessed Innocent DisPEL Evi AND Goop Level 5 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (powdered silver and iron) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute For the duration, Celestials, Elementals, Fey, Fiends, and Undead have Disadvantage on attack rolls against you. You can end the spell early by using ei- ther of the following special functions. Break Enchantment. As a Magic action, you touch a creature that is possessed by or has the Charmed or Frightened condition from one or more creatures of the types above. The target is no longer pos- sessed, Charmed, or Frightened by such creatures. Dismissal. As a Magic action, you target one crea- ture you can see within 5 feet of you that has one of the creature types above. The target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be sent back to its home plane if it isn't there already. If they aren't on their home plane, Undead are sent to the Shadow- fell, and Fey are sent to the Feywild. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS #, 263 264 A owarr PALADIN EMPOWERS HER WEAPON WITH Divine SmiTE, UNLEASHING HOLY # Wrath On Fiendish Mezzoloths. DIsPEL MaGic Level 3 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Choose one creature, object, or magical effect within range. Any ongoing spell of level 3 or lower on the target ends. For each ongoing spell of level 4 or higher on the target, make an ability check us- ing your spellcasting ability (DC 10 plus that spell's Jevel). On a successful check, the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You automatically end a spell on the target if the spell's level is equal to or less than the level of the spell slot you use. DISSONANT WHISPERS Level 1 Enchantment (Bard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous One creature of your choice that you can see within range hears a discordant melody in its mind. The # CHAPTER \| SPELLS target makes a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, it takes 3d6 Psychic damage and must imme- diately use its Reaction, if available, to move as far away from you as it can, using the safest route. Ona successful save, the target takes half as much dam- age only. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. DIVINATION Level 4 Divination (Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (incense worth 25+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous This spell puts you in contact with a god or a god's servants. You ask one question about a specific goal, event, or activity to occur within 7 days. The DM offers a truthful reply, which might be a short phrase or cryptic rhyme spell doesn't account for circumstances that might change the answer, such as the casting of other spells. If you cast the spell mo » once before finish- ing a Long Rest, there is: lative 25 percent chance for each casting after the first that you get no answer. # Divine Favor Level 1 Transmutation (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: 1 minute Until the spell ends, your attacks with weapons deal an extra 1d4 Radiant damage on a hit. # Divine Smite Level 1 Evocation (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a target with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: Instantaneous The target takes an extra 2d8 Radiant damage from the attack. The damage increases by 1d8 if the tar- get is a Fiend or an Undead. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 1. DiviNnE WorD Level 7 Evocation (Cleric) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 30 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You utter a word imbued with power from the Up- per Planes. Each creature of your choice in range makes a Charisma saving throw. On a failed save, a target that has SO Hit Points or fewer suffers an effect based on its current Hit Points, as shown in the Divine Word Effects table. Regardless of its Hit Points, a Celestial, an Elemental, a Fey, or a Fiend target that fails its save is forced back to its plane of origin (if it isn't there already) and can't return to the current plane for 24 hours by any means short of a Wish spell. Divine WorbD EFFECTS Hit Points Effect 0-20 'The target dies. 21-30 The target has the Blinded, Deafened, and Stunned conditions for 1 hour. 31-40 The target has the Blinded and Deaf- evied conditions for 10 minutes. 41-50 The target has the Deafened condition 'or 1 minute. = \| a Dominate Beast Level 4 Enchantment (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute One Beast you can see within range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. The target has Advantage on the save if you or your allies are fighting it. Whenever the target takes damage, it repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. You have a telepathic link with the Charmed tar- get while the two of you are on the same plane of existence. On your turn, you can use this link to issue commands to the target (no action required), such as "Attack that creature," "Move over there," or "Fetch that object." The target does its best to obey on its turn. If it completes an order and doesn't receive further direction from you, it acts and moves as it likes, focusing on protecting itself. You can command the target to take a Reaction but must take your own Reaction to do so. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Your Concentra- tion can last longer with a spell slot of level 5 (up to 10 minutes), 6 (up to 1 hour), or 7+ (up to 8 hours). # Dominate Monster Level 8 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour One creature you can see within range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. The target has Advantage on the save if you or your allies are fight- ing it. Whenever the target takes damage, it repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. You have a telepathic link with the Charmed tar- get while the two of you are on the same plane of existence. On your turn, you can use this link to issue commands to the target (no action required), such as "Attack that creature," "Move over there," or "Fetch that object." The target does its best to. obey on its turn. If it completes an order and doesn't receive further direction from you, it acts and moves as it likes, focusing on protecting itself. You can command the target to take a Reaction but must take your own Reaction to do so. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Your Concentra- tion can last longer with a level 9 spell slot (up to 8 hours). iA. CHAPTER7\|SPELLS 96m ----------------- ---~---=C~\*=\<"'\<;7X;3S ttt" 266 DOMINATE PERSON ' Level 5 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute One Humanoid you can see within range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. The target has Advantage on the save if you or your allies are fight- ing it. Whenever the target takes damage, it repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. You have a telepathic link with the Charmed tar- get while the two of you are on the same plane of existence. On your turn, you can use this link to issue commands to the target (no action required), such as "Attack that creature," "Move over there," or "Fetch that object." The target does its best to obey on its turn. If it completes an order and doesn't receive further direction from you, it acts and moves as it likes, focusing on protecting itself. You can command the target to take a Reaction but must take your own Reaction to do so. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Your Concentra- tion can last longer with a spell slot of level 6 (up to 10 minutes), 7 (up to 1 hour), or 8+ (up to 8 hours). Dracon's BREATH Level 2 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a hot pepper) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You touch one willing creature, and choose Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Poison. Until the spell ends, the target can take a Magic action to exhale a 15-foot Cone. Each creature in that area makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 3d6 damage of the chosen type on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage increases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 2. DrawMIj's INSTANT SUMMONS Level 6 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a sapphire worth 1,000+ GP) Duration: Until dispelled You touch the sapphire used in the casting and an object weighing 10 pounds or less whose longest di- mension is 6 feet or less. The spell leaves an Invisible