# CHAPTER \| SPELLS While Charmed, the creature takes 5d10 Psychic damage if it acts in a manner directly counter to your command. It takes this damage no more than once each day. You can issue any command you choose, short of an activity that would result in certain death, Should you issue a suicidal command, the spell ends, A Remove Curse, Greater Restoration, or Wish spell ends this spell. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. If you use a level 7 or 8 spell slot, the duration is 365 days. If you use a level 9 spell slot, the spell lasts until it is ended by one of the spells mentioned above. GENTLE REPOSE Level 2 Necromancy (Cleric, Paladin, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (2 Copper Pieces, which the spell consumes) Duration: 10 days You touch a corpse or other remains. For the dura- tion, the target is protected from decay and can't become Undead. The spell also effectively extends the time limit on raising the target from the dead, since days spent under the influence of this spell don't count against the time limit of speils sich as Raise Dead. GIANT INSECT Level 4 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You summon a giant centipede, spider, or wasp (chosen when you cast the spell). It manifests in an unoccupied space you can see within range and uses the Giant Insect stat block. The form you choose determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It GIANT INSECT ) Large Beast, Unaligned AC 11 + the spell's level HP 30 + 10 for each spell level Speed 40 ft., Climb 40 ft., Fly 40 ft. (Wasp only) MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 17 +3 +3 Dex 13 +1 +1 Conl5 +2 +2 \| intr 4 -3 -3 Wis 14 +2 +2 CHaA3 -4 -4 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 Languages Understands the languages you know CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS Spider Climb. The insect can climb difficult surfaces, including along ceilings, without needing to make an ability check. ACTIONS | Multiattack. The insect makes a number of attacks | equal to half this spell's level (round down). | Poison Jab. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 10 ft. Hit: 1d6 + 3 plus the spell's level Piercing damage plus 1d4 Poison damage. Web Bolt (Spider Only). Ranged Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, range 60 ft. Hit: 1d10 +3 plus the spell's level Bludgeoning damage, and the target's Speed is reduced to 0 until the start of the in- sect's next turn. BONUS A" IONS Venomous '3 ew (Centipede Only). Constitution Saving Throw: Your «pell save DC, one creature the insect can see within 1) feet. Failure: The target has the Poisoned condition uti the start of the insect's next turn. obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. GLIBNESS Level 8 Enchantment (Bard, Warlock) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: 1 hour Until the spell ends, when you make a Charisma check, you can replace the number you roll with a 15. Additionally, no matter what you say, magic that would determine if you are telling the truth indi- cates that you are being truthful. GLOBE OF INVULNERABILITY Level 6 Abjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a glass bead) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute An immobile, shimmering barrier appears in a 10- foot Emanation around you and remains for the duration. Any spell of level 5 or lower cast from outside the barrier can't affect anything within it. Such a spell can target creatures and objects within the barrier, but the spell has no effect on them. Similarly, the area within the barrier is excluded from areas of effect created by such spells. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The barrier blocks spells of 1 level higher for each spell slot level above 6. # Glyph Of Warding Level 3 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (powdered diamond worth 200+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled or triggered You inscribe a glyph that later unleashes a magical effect. You inscribe it either on a surface (such as a table or a section of floor) or within an object that can be closed (such as a book or chest) to conceal the glyph. The glyph can cover an area no larger # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 979Q \<\<. \~ than 10 feet in diameter. If the surface or object is moved more than 10 feet from where you cast this spell, the glyph is broken, and the spell ends without being triggered.: The glyph is nearly imperceptible and requires a successful Wisdom (Perception) check against your spell save DC to notice.; When you inscribe the glyph, you set its trigger and choose whether it's an explosive rune or a spell glyph, as explained below. Set the Trigger. You decide what triggers the glyph when you cast the spell. For glyphs inscribed on a surface, common triggers include touching or step- ping on the glyph, removing another object cover- ing it, or approaching within a certain distance of it. For glyphs inscribed within an object, common trig- gers include opening that object or seeing the glyph. Once a glyph is triggered, this spell ends. You can refine the trigger so that only creatures of certain types activate it (for example, the glyph could be set to affect Aberrations). You can also set conditions for creatures that don't trigger the glyph, such as those who say a certain password. Explosive Rune. When triggered, the glyph erupts with magical energy in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on the glyph. Each creature in the area makes a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 5d8 Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder damage; (your choice when you create the glyph) on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Spell Glyph. You can store a prepared spell of level 3 or lower in the glyph by casting it as part of creating the glyph. The spell must target a single creature or an area. The spell being stored has no immediate effect when cast in this way. When the glyph is triggered, the stored spell takes effect. If the spell has a target, it targets the crea- ture that triggered the glyph. If the spell affects an area, the area is centered on that creature. If the spell summons Hostile creatures or creates harmful objects or traps, they appear as close as possible to the intruder and attack it. If the spell requires Con- centration, it lasts until the end of its full duration. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage of an explosive rune increases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 3. If you create a spell glyph, you can store any spell of up to the same level as the spell slot you use for the Glyph of Warding. aN CHAPTER7\|SPELLS GOODBERRY Level 1 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a sprig of mistletoe) Duration: 24 hours Ten berries appear in your hand and are infused with magic for the duration. A creature can takea Bonus Action to eat one berry. Eating a berry re- stores 1 Hit Point, and the berry provides enough nourishment to sustain a creature for one day. Uneaten berries disappear when the spell ends, GRASPING VINE Level 4 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You conjure a vine that sprouts from a surface in an unoccupied space that you can see within range. The vine lasts for the duration. Make a melee spell attack against a creature within 30 feet of the vine. On a hit, the target takes 4d8 Bludgeoning damage and is pulled up to 30 feet toward the vine; if the target is Huge or smaller, it has the Grappled condition (escape DC equal to your spell save DC). The vine can grapple only one creature at a time, and you can cause the vine to release a Grappled creature (no action required). Asa Bonus Action on your later turns, you can repeat the attack against a creature within 30 feet of the vine. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The number of creatures the vine can grapple increases by one for each spell slot level above 4. GREASE Level 1 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of pork rind or butter) Duration: 1 minute Nonflammable grease covers the ground in a 10-foot square centered on a point within range and turns it into Difficult Terrain for the duration. When the grease appears, each creature stand- ing in its area must succeed ona Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition. A creature that enters the area or ends its turn there must also suc- ceed on that save or fa!! Prone, A HALFLING CLERIC CASTS GUARDIAN OF FAITH TO # Feno Off A Ravenous Worg. Y: GREATER INVISIBILITY Level 4 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A creature you touch has the Invisible condition un- til the spell ends. GREATER RESTORATION Level 5 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (diamond dust worth 100+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You touch a creature and magically remove one of the following effects from it: - 1 Exhaustion level - The Charmed or Petrified condition - Acurse, including the target's Attunement to a cursed magic item - Any reduction to one of the target's ability scores - Any reduction to the target's Hit Point maximum GuaRDIAN OF FAITH Level 4 Conjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V Duration: 8 hours A Large spectral guardian appears and hovers for the duration in an unoccupied space that you can see within range. The guardian occupies that space and is invulnerable, and it appears in a form appro- priate for your deity or pantheon. Any enemy that moves to a space within 10 feet of the guardian for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 20 Radiant damage ona failed save or half as much damage ona successful one, The guardian vanishes when it has dealt a total of 60 damage. Apantrryn 7! epnprritre ---\_ GUARDS AND WARDS Level 6 Abjuration (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a silver rod worth 10+ GP) Duration: 24 hours You create a ward that protects up to 2,500 square feet of floor space. The warded area can be up to 20 feet tall, and you shape it as one 50-foot square, one hundred 5-foot squares that are contiguous, or twenty-five 10-foot squares that are contiguous. When you cast this spell, you can specify indi- viduals that are unaffected by the spell's effects. You can also specify a password that, when spoken aloud within 5 feet of the warded area, makes the speaker immune to its effects. The spell creates the effects below within the warded area. Dispel Magic has no effect on Guards and Wards itself, but each of the following effects can be dispelled. If all four are dispelled, Guards and Wards ends. If you cast the spell every day for 365 days on the same area, the spell thereafter lasts un- til all its effects are dispelled. Corridors. Fog fills all the warded corridors, mak- ing them Heavily Obscured. In addition, at each intersection or branching passage offering a choice of direction, there is a 50 percent chance that a creature other than you believes it is going in the opposite direction from the one it chooses. Doors. All doors in the warded area are magically locked, as if sealed by the Arcane Lock spell. In addi- tion, you can cover up to ten doors with an illusion to make them appear as plain sections of wall. Stairs. Webs fill all stairs in the warded area from top to bottom, as in the Web spell. These strands regrow in 10 minutes if they are destroyed while Guards and Wards lasts. Other Spell Effect. Place one of the following magi- cal effects within the warded area: - Dancing Lights in four corridors, with a simple pro- gram that the lights repeat as long as Guards and Wards lasts - Magic Mouth in two locations - Stinking Cloud in two locations (the vapors return within 10 minutes if dispersed while Guards and Wards lasts) - Gust of Wind in one corridor or room (the wind blows continuously while the spell Jasts) - Suggestion in one 5-foot square; any creature that enters that square receives the suggestion mentally # CHAPTER! SPFITS GUIDANCE Divination Cantrip (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Component: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You touch a willing creature and choose a skill U til the spell ends, the creature adds 1d4 to any abil. ity check using the chosen skill. GuIDING BOLT Level 1 Evocation (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: 1 round You hurl a bolt of light toward a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target, On a hit, it takes 4d6 Radiant damage, and the next attack roll made against it before the end of your next turn has Advantage. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage increases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1 Gust oF WIND Level 2 Evocation (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a legume seed) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A Line of strong wind 60 feet long and 10 feet wide blasts from you in a direction you choose for the duration. Each creature in the Line must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed 15 feet away from you in a direction following the Line. A crea- ture that ends its turn in the Line must make the same save. Any creature in the Line must spend 2 feet of movement for every 1 foot it moves when moving closer to you. The gust disperses gas or vapor, and it extin- guishes candles and similar unprotected flames in the area. It causes protected flames, such as those of lanterns, to dance wildly and has a 50 percent chance to extinguish them. As a Bonus Action on your later turns, you can change the direction in which the Line blasts from you. HAIL OF THORNS Level 1 Conjuration (Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a creature with a Ranged weapon Range: Self Components: V Duration: Instantaneous As you hit the creature, this spell creates a rain of thorns that sprouts from your Ranged weapon or ammunition. The target of the attack and each creature within 5 feet of it make a Dexterity saving throw, taking 1d10 Piercing damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 1. HALLOW Level 5 Abjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: 24 hours Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (incense worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled You touch a point and infuse an area around it with holy or unholy power. The area can have a radius up to 60 feet, and the spell fails if the radius includes an area already under the effect of Hallow. The affected area has the following effects. Hallowed Ward. Choose any of these creature types: Aberration, Celestial, Elemental, Fey, Fiend, or Undead. Creatures of the chosen types can't willingly enter the area, and any creature that is possessed by or that has the Charmed or Fright- ened condition from such creatures isn't possessed, Charmed, or Frightened by them while in the area. Extra Effect. You bind an extra effect to the area from the list below: Courage. Creatures of any types you choose can't gain the Frightened condition while in the area. Darkness. Darkness fills the area. Normal light, as well as magical light created by spells of a level lower than this spell, can't illuminate the area. Daylight. Bright light fills the area. Magical Dark- ness created by spells of a level lower than this spell can't extinguish the light. Peaceful Rest. Dead bodies interred in the area can't be turned into Undead. Extradimensional Interference. Creatures of any types you choose can't enter or exit the area using teleporta'ion or interplanar travel. Fear. Creatures of any types you choose have the Frightened condition while in the area. ce. Creatures of any types you choose have stance to one damage type of your choice while in the area. Siler ice. No sound can emanate from within the \_ area, and no sound can reach into it. Tongues. Creatures of any types you choose can communicate with any other creature in the area even if they don't share a common language. Vulnerability. Creatures of any types you choose have Vulnerability to one damage type of your choice while in the area. # Hallucinatory Terrain Level 4 Illusion (Bard, Druid, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 300 feet Components: V, S, M (a mushroom) Duration: 24 hours You make natural terrain in a 150-foot Cube in range look, sound, and smell like another sort of natural terrain. Thus, open fields or a road can be made to resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other difficult or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem like a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope, or a rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road. Manufactured structures, equipment, and creatures within the area aren't changed. The tactile characteristics of the terrain are un- changed, so creatures entering the area are likely to notice the illusion. If the difference isn't obvious by touch, a creature examining the illusion can take the Study action to make an Intelligence (Investiga- tion) check against your spell save DC to disbelieve it. If a creature discerns that the terrain is illusory, the creature sees a vague image superimposed on the real terrain. HARM Level 6 Necromancy (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You unleash virulent magic on a creature you can see within range. The target makes a Constitution saving throw. Ona failed save, it takes 14d6 Ne- crotic damage, and its Hit Point maximum is re- duced by an amount equal to the Necrotic damage it took. On a successful save, it takes half as much damage only. This spell can't reduce a target's Hit Point maximum below 1.. ------" a rrr er at # 284. --- HASTE; Level 3 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet; Components: V, S, M (a shaving of licorice root) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Choose a willing creature that you can see within range. Until the spell ends, the target's Speed is doubled, it gains a +2 bonus to Armor Class, it has Advantage on Dexterity saving throws, and it gains an additional action on each of its turns. That ac- tion can be used to take only the Attack (one attack only), Dash, Disengage, Hide, or Utilize action. When the spell ends, the target is Incapacitated and has a Speed of 0 until the end of its next turn, as a wave of lethargy washes over it. HEAL Level 6 Abjuration (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Choose a creature that you can see within range. Positive energy washes through the target, restor- ing 70 Hit Points. This spell also ends the Blinded, Deafened, and Poisoned conditions on the target. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing in- creases by 10 for each spell slot level above 6. HEALING WorD Level 1 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous A creature of your choice that you can see within range regains Hit Points equal to 2d4 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing in- creases by 2d4 for each spell slot level above 1. HEAT METAL Level 2 Transmutation (Bard, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a piece of iron and a flame) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Choose a manufactured metal object, such as a metal weapon or a suit of Heavy or Medium metal # CHAPTER \| SPELLS armor, that you can see within range. You cause the object to glow red-hot. Any creature in physical contact with the object takes 2d8 Fire damage when you cast the spell. Until the spell ends, you can take a Bonus Action on each of your later turns to deal this damage again if the object is within range. If a creature is holding or wearing the object and takes the damage from it, the creature must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or drop the object if it can. If it doesn't drop the object, it has Disadvan- tage on attack rolls and ability checks until the start of your next turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage increases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 2, # Hellish Rebuke Level 1 Evocation (Warlock) Casting Time: Reaction, which you take in response to taking damage from a creature that you can see within 60 feet of yourself Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous The creature that damaged you is momentarily sur- rounded by green flames. It makes a Dexterity say- ing throw, taking 2d10 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one, Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 1, HEROES' FEAST Level 6 Conjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a gem-encrusted bowl worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You conjure a feast that appears on a surface in an unoccupied 10-foot Cube next to you. The feast takes 1 hour to consume and disappears at the end of that time, and the beneficial effects don't set in until this hour is over. Up to twelve creatures can partake of the feast. A creature that partakes gains several benefits, which last for 24 hours. The creature has Resis- tance to Poison damage, and it has Immunity to the Frightened and Poisoned conditions. Its Hit Point maximum also increases by 2d10, and it gains the same number of Hit Points. HEROISM Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A willing creature you touch is imbued with brav- ery. Until the spell ends, the creature is immune to the Frightened condition and gains Temporary Hit Points equal to your spellcasting ability modifier at the start of each of its turns. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. HEx Level 1 Enchantment (Warlock) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (the petrified eye of a newt) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You place a curse on a creature that you can see within range. Until the spell ends, you deal an extra 1d6 Necrotic damage to the target whenever you hit it with an attack roll. Also, choose one ability when you cast the spell. The target has Disadvantage on ability checks made with the chosen ability. If the target drops to O Hit Points before this spell ends, you can take a Bonus Action on a later turn to curse a new creature. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Your Concentra- tion can last longer with a spell slot of level 2 (up to 4 hours), 3-4 (up to 8 hours), or 5+ (24 hours). HOLD MONSTER Level 5 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a straight piece of iron) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Choose a creature that you can see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Paralyzed condition for the duration. At the end of each of its turns, the target repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 5. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS o8rn 286 \| # Hold Person Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a straight piece of iron) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Choose a Humanoid that you can see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Paralyzed condition for the duration. At the end of each of its turns, the target repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional Humanoid for each spell slot level above 2. HOLy AuRA Level 8 Abjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a reliquary worth 1,000+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute For the duration, you emit an aura in a 30-foot Em- anation. While in the aura, creatures of your choice # CHAPTER \| SPELLS ee eee AN AasimarR WARLOCK EXPOSES FOES TO THE ALL-CONSUMING HUNGER OF HMaoaR. have Advantage on all saving throws, and other creatures have Disadvantage on attack rolls against them. In addition, when a Fiend or an Undead hits an affected creature with a melee attack roll, the attacker must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or have the Blinded condition until the end of its next turn. HUNGER OF HADAR Level 3 Conjuration (Warlock) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a pickled tentacle) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You open a gateway to the Far Realm, a region in- fested with unspeakable horrors. A 20-foot-radius Sphere of Darkness appears, centered on a point with range and lasting for the duration. The Sphere is Difficult Terrain, and it is filled with strange whis- pers and slurping noises, which can be heard up to 30 feet away. No light, magical or otherwise, can il- luminate the area, and creatures fully within it have the Blinded condition. Any creature that starts its turr. in the area takes 2d6 Cold damage. Any creature ihat ends its turn there must icceed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 2d6 Acid damage from otherworldly tentacles. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Cold or Acid damage (your choice) increases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 3. HunTER'S MARK Level 1 Divination (Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 90 feet Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You magically mark one creature you can see within range as your quarry. Until the spell ends, you deal an extra 1d6 Force damage to the target whenever you hit it with an attack roll. You also have Advantage on any Wisdom (Perception or Sur- vival) check you make to find it. If the target drops to O Hit Points before this spell ends, you can take a Bonus Action to move the mark to anew creature you can see within range. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Your Concentra- tion can last longer with a spell slot of level 3-4 (up to 8 hours) or 5+ (up to 24 hours). HypNOTIC PATTERN Level 3 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: S, M (a pinch of confetti) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a twisting pattern of colors in a 30-foot Cube within range. The pattern appears for a mo- ment and vanishes. Each creature in the area who can see the pattern must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. While Charmed, the creature has the Incapacitated condition and a Speed of 0. The spell ends for an affected creature if it takes any damage or if someone else uses an action to shake the creature out of its stupor. IcE KNIFE Level 1 Conjuration (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: S, M (a drop of water or a piece of ice) Duration: Instantaneous You create a shard of ice and fling it at one creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. (i. « hit, the target takes 1d10 Piercing damage. Hit «..:iss, the shard then explodes. The lef FF a y Ice Knire be f target and each creature within 5 feet of it must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 2d6 Cold damage., Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Cold damage increases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. Icz STORM Level 4 Evocation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 300 feet Components: V, S, M (a mitten) Duration: Instantaneous Hail falls in a 20-foot-radius, 40-foot-high Cylinder centered on a point within range. Each creature in the Cylinder makes a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 2d10 Bludgeoning damage and 4d6 Cold damage on a failed save or half as much dam- age on a successful one. Hailstones turn ground in the Cylinder into Diffi- cult Terrain until the end of your next turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Bludgeoning damage increases by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 4. IDENTIFY \| Level 1 Divination (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a pearl worth 100+ GP) Duration: Instantaneous You touch an object throughout the spell's casting. If the object is a magic item or some other magi- \| cal object, you learn its properties and how to use them, whether it requires Attunement, and how many charges it has, if any. You learn whether any ongoing spells are affecting the item and what they are. If the item was created by a spell, you learn that spell's name. If you instead touch a creature throughout the casting, you learn which ongoing spells, if any, are currently affecting it. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 287 --- ILLusory SCRIPT Level 1 Illusion (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Touch ' Components: S, M (ink worth 10+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: 10 days You write on parchment, paper, or another suitable material and imbue it with an illusion that lasts for the duration. To you and any creatures you desig- nate when you cast the spell, the writing appears normal, seems to be written in your hand, and conveys whatever meaning you intended when you wrote the text. To all others, the writing appears as if it were written in an unknown or magical script that is unintelligible. Alternatively, the illusion can alter the meaning, handwriting, and language of the text, though the language must be one you know. If the spell is dispelled, the original script and the illusion both disappear. A creature that has Truesight can read the hidden message. IMPRISONMENT Level 9 Abjuration (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a statuette of the target worth 5,000+ GP) Duration: Until dispelled You create a magical restraint to hold a creature that you can see within range. The target must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a successful save, the target is unaffected, and it is immune to this spell for the next 24 hours. On a failed save, the target is imprisoned. While imprisoned, the target doesn't need to breathe, eat, or drink, and it doesn't age. Divination spells can't locate or perceive the imprisoned target, and the target can't teleport. Until the spell ends, the target is also affected by one of the following effects of your choice: Burial. The target is entombed beneath the earth in a hollow globe of magical force that is just large enough to contain the target. Nothing can pass into or out of the globe. Chaining. Chains firmly rooted in the ground hold the target in place. The target has the Restrained condition and can't be moved by any means. Hedged Prison. The target is trapped in a demi- plane that is warded against teleportation and planar travel. The demiplane is your choice of a labyrinth, a cage, a tower, or the like. 288 \| CHAPTER \| SPELLS Minimus Containment. The target becomes 1 inch tall and is trapped inside an indestructible gem- stone or a similar object. Light can pass through the gemstone (allowing the target to see out and \| other creatures to see in), but nothing else can \| pass through by any means. Slumber. The target has the Unconscious condition and can't be awoken. Ending the Spell. When you cast the spell, specify a trigger that will end it. The trigger can be as sim- ple or as elaborate as you choose, but the DM must agree that it has a high likelihood of happening within the next decade. The trigger must be an ob- servable action, such as someone making a partic- ular offering at the temple of your god, saving your true love, or defeating a specific monster. A Dispel Magic spell can end the spell only if it is cast with a level 9 spell slot, targeting either the prison or the component used to create it. INCENDIARY CLOUD Level 8 Conjuration (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A swirling cloud of embers and smoke fills a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point within range. The cloud's area is Heavily Obscured. It lasts for the duration or until a strong wind (like that created by Gust of Wind) disperses it. When the cloud appears, each creature in it makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 10d8 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature must also make this save when the Sphere moves into its space and when it enters the Sphere or ends its turn there. A creature makes this save only once per turn. The cloud moves 10 feet away from you in a direc- tion you choose at the start of each of your turns. INFLICT WOUNDS Level 1 Necromancy (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A creature you touch makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 2d10 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Stat. The damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spe!! slot level above 1. INSECT PLAGUE Level 5 Conjuration (Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Action Range: 300 feet Components: V, S, M (a locust) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes Swarming locusts fill a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point you choose within range. The Sphere remains for the duration, and its area is Lightly Obscured and Difficult Terrain. When the swarm appears, each creature in it makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 4d10 Piercing damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature also makes this save when it enters the spell's area for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there. A creature makes this save only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by Id10 for each spell slot level above 5. WITH HER SPELL, JALLaRzi's Storm oF RADIANCE, THE WARLOCK JALLARTI MAKES VROCKS REGRET LEAVING THE AByss. INVISIBILITY Level 2 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (an eyelash in gum arabic) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour A creature you touch has the Invisible condition un- til the spell ends. The spell ends early immediately after the target makes an attack roll, deals damage, or casts a spell. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 2. JALLARZI's STORM OF RADIANCE Level 5 Evocation (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Component: V, S, M (a pinch of phosphorus) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You unleash a storm of flashing light and raging thunder in a 10-foot-radius, 40-foot-high Cylin- der centered on a point you can see within range. While in this area, creatures have the Blinded and # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 289 Deafened conditions, and they can't cast spells with a Verbal component. sv When the storm appears, each creature in it makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 2410 Radiant damage and 2d10 Thunder damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature also makes this save when it enters the spell's area for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there. A creature makes this save only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Radiant and Thunder damage increase by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 5. JuMP Level 1 Transmutation (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Touch Component: V, S, M (a grasshopper's hind leg) Duration: 1 minute You touch a willing creature. Once on each of its turns until the spell ends, that creature can jump up to 30 feet by spending 10 feet of movement. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. Knock Level 2 Transmutation (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous Choose an object that you can see within range. The object can be a door, a box, a chest, a set of man- acles, a padlock, or another object that contains a mundane or magical means that prevents access. A target that is held shut by a mundane lock or that is stuck or barred becomes unlocked, unstuck, or unbarred. If the object has multiple locks, only one of them is unlocked. If the target is held shut by Arcane Lock, that spell is suppressed for 10 minutes, during which time the target can be opened and closed. When you cast the spell, a loud knock, audible up to 300 feet away, emanates from the target. # Legend Lore Level 5 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Self Components: V, S, M (incense worth 250+ GP, which the spell consumes, and four ivory strips worth 50+ GP each) Duration: Instantaneous Name or describe a famous person, place, or object. The spell brings to your mind a brief summary of the significant lore about that famous thing, as de- scribed by the DM. The lore might consist of important details, amus- ing revelations, or even secret lore that has never been widely known. The more information you already know about the thing, the more precise and detailed the information you receive is. That infor- mation is accurate but might be couched in figura- tive language or poetry, as determined by the DM. If the famous thing you chose isn't actually fa- mous, you hear sad musical notes played on a trom- bone, and the spell fails. LEOMUND'S SECRET CHEST Level 4 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a chest, 3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet, constructed from rare materials worth 5,000+ GP, and a Tiny replica of the chest made from the same materials worth 50+ GP) Duration: Until dispelled You hide a chest and all its contents on the Ethereal Plane. You must touch the chest and the miniature replica that serve as Material components for the spell. The chest can contain up to 12 cubic feet of \| nonliving material (3 feet by 2 feet by 2 feet). While the chest remains on the Ethereal Plane, you can take a Magic action and touch the replica to recall the chest. It appears in an unoccupied space on the ground within 5 feet of you. You can send the chest back to the Ethereal Plane by taking a Magic action to touch the chest and the replica. After 60 days, there is a cumulative 5 percent chance at the end of each day that the spell ends. The spell also ends if you cast this spell again or if the Tiny replica chest is destroyed. If the spell ends and the larger chest is on the Ethereal Plane, the chest remains there for you or someone else to find. LEOMUND Ss TINy Hut Level 3 Evocation (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: \] minute or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a crystal bead) Duration: 8 hours A 10-foot Emanation springs into existence around you and remains stationary for the duration. The spell fails when you cast it if the Emanation isn't big enough to fully encapsulate all creatures in its area. Creatures and objects within the Emanation when you cast the spell can move through it freely. All other creatures and objects are barred from passing through it. Spells of level 3 or lower can't be cast through it, and the effects of such spells can't ex- tend into it. The atmosphere inside the Emanation is com- fortable and dry, regardless of the weather outside, Until the spell ends, you can command the interior to have Dim Light or Darkness (no action required), The Emanation is opaque from the outside and of any color you choose, but it's transparent from the inside. The spell ends early if you leave the Emanation or if you cast it again. LEsser RESTORATION Level 2 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Touch Components; V, s Duration: Instantaneous You touch a creature and end one condition on it: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed, or Poisoned. LEVITATE Level 2 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a metal spring) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes One creature or loose object of your choice that you can see within range rises vertically up to 20 feet and remains suspended there for the duration. The spell can levitate an object that weighs up to 500 pounds. An unwilling creature that succeeds on a Constitution saving throw is unaffected. The target can move only by pushing or pulling against a fixed object or surface within reach (such as a wall or a ceiling), which allows it to move as if it were climbing. You can change the target's altitude by up to 20 feet in either direction on your turn. If you are the target, you can move up or down as part of your move. Otherwise, you can take a Magic ace tion to move the target, which must remain within the spell's range. When the spell ends, the target floats gently to the ground if it is still aloft. LiGHT Evocation Cantrip (Bard, Cleric, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, M (a firefly or phosphorescent moss) Duration: 1 hour You touch one Large or smaller object that isn't being worn or carried by someone else. Until the spell ends, the object sheds Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. The light can be colored as you like. Covering the object with something opaque blocks the light. The spell ends if you cast it again.