# Areas Of Knowledge Skill Areas Arcana Spells, magic items, eldritch symbols, magical traditions, planes of exis- tence, and certain creatures (Aberra- tions, Constructs, Elementals, Fey, and Monstrosities) History Historic events and people, ancient civilizations, wars, and certain crea- tures (Giants and Humanoids) Investigation Traps, ciphers, riddles, and gadgetry Nature Terrain, flora, weather, and certain creatures (Beasts, Dragons, Oozes, and Plants) Religion Deities, religious hierarchies and rites, holy symbols, cults, and certain crea- tures (Celestials, Fiends, and' Padsadle STUNNED \[ConpITION\] F While you have the Stunned condition, you experi- ence the following effects. Incapacitated. You have the Incapacitated condition.; Saving Throws Affected. You automatically fail Strength and Dexterity saving throws. Attacks Affected, Attack rolls against you have Advantage. SUFFOCATION \[Hazarp\] A creature can hold its breath for a number of minutes equal to 1 plus its Constitution modifier (minimum of 30 seconds) before suffocation begins. When a creature runs out of breath or is chok- ing, it gains 1 Exhaustion level at the end of each of its turns. When a creature can breathe again, it removes all levels of Exhaustion it gained from suffocating. SURPRISE If a creature is caught unawares by the start of combat, that creature is surprised, which causes it to have Disadvantage on its Initiative roll. See also chapter 1 ("Combat"). SWIMMING While you're swimming, each foot of movement costs 1 extra foot (2 extra feet in Difficult Terrain). You ignore this extra cost if you have a Swim Speed and use it to swim. At the DM's option, moving any distance in rough water might require a successful DC 15 Strength (Athletics) check. Swim SPEED A Swim Speed can be used to swim without expend- ing the extra movement normally associated with swimming. See also "Swimming" and "Speed." TARGET A target is the creature or object targeted by an attack roll, forced to make a saving throw by an effect, or selected to receive the effects of a spell or another phenomenon. TELEPATHY Telepathy is a magical ability that allows a creature to communicate mentally with another creature within a specified range. Unless a rule states other- wise, the contacted creature doesn't need to share a language with the telepath to understand this com- munication, but the contacted creature must be able to understand at least one language or be telepathic itself to understand. A telepath doesn't need to see a contacted crea- ture, and the telepath can start or end the telepathic contact at any time (no action required). Telepathic contact can't be initiated and is immediately broken if either the telepath or the other creature has the Incapacitated condition. Telepathic contact is also broken if the contacted creature is no longer within the telepathy's range or if the telepath contacts a different creature within range. A creature without telepathy can receive tele- pathic messages but can't initiate a telepathic con- versation. Once a telepathic conversation starts, the non-telepath can communicate mentally to the telepath until the telepathic connection ends. TELEPORTATION Teleportation is a special kind of magical transportation. If you teleport, you disappear and reappear elsewhere instantly, without moving through the in- tervening space. This transportation doesn't expend movement unless a rule tells you otherwise, and teleportation never provokes Opportunity Attacks. When you teleport, all the equipment you're wearing and carrying teleports with you. If you're touching another creature when you teleport, that creature doesn't teleport with you unless the teleportation effect says otherwise. If the destination space of your teleportation is occupied by another creature or blocked by a solid obstacle, you instead appear in the nearest unoccu- pied space of your choice. The description of a teleportation effect tells you if you must see the teleportation's destination. TEMPORARY HiT Points Temporary Hit Points are granted by certain effects and act as a buffer against losing real Hit Points. See also chapter 1 ("Damage and Healing"). --- TREMORSENSE A creature with Tremorsense can pinpoint the location of creatures and moving objects within a specific range, provided that the creature with Tremorsense and anything it is detecting are both in contact with the same surface (such as the ground, a wall, or a ceiling) or the same liquid. Tremorsense can't detect creatures or objects in the air, and it doesn't count as a form of sight. TRUESIGHT If you have Truesight, your vision is enhanced within a specified range. Within that range, your vision pierces through the following: Darkness. You can see in normal and magical Darkness. Invisibility. You see creatures and objects that have the Invisible condition. Visual Illusions. Visual illusions appear transpar- ent to you, and you automatically succeed on sav- ing throws against them. 'Transformations. You discern the true form of any creature or object you see that has been trans- formed by magic. Ethereal Plane. You see into the Ethereal Plane. See also appendix A ("Transitive Planes"). # Unarmed Strike Instead of using a weapon to make a melee attack, you can use a punch, kick, head-butt, or similar forceful blow. In game terms, this is an Unarmed Strike---a melee attack that involves you using your body to damage, grapple, or shove a target within 5 feet of you. Whenever you use your Unarmed Strike, choose one of the following options for its effect. Damage. You make an attack roll against the tar- get. Your bonus to the roll equals your Strength modifier plus your Proficiency Bonus. On a hit, the target takes Bludgeoning damage equal to 1 plus your Strength modifier. Grapple. The target must succeed on a Strength or Dexterity saving throw (it chooses which), or it has the Grappled condition. The DC for the saving throw and any escape attempts equals 8 plus your Strength modifier and Proficiency Bonus. This grapple is possible only if the target is no more than one size larger than you and if you have a hand free to grab it. See also "Grappling." a' Shove. The target must succeed ona Strength or Dexterity saving throw (it chooses which), or you either push it 5 feet away or cause it to have the Prone condition. The DC for the saving throw equals 8 plus your Strength modifier and Profi- ciency Bonus. This shove is possible only if the tar- get is no more than one size larger than you. as = = = Unconscious \[ConpiTion\] While you have the Unconscious condition, you ex- perience the following effects. Inert. You have the Incapacitated and Prone conditions, and you drop whatever you're holding. When this condition ends, you remain Prone. Speed 0. Your Speed is 0 and can't increase. Attacks Affected. Attack rolls against you have Advantage. Saving Throws Affected. You automatically fail Strength and Dexterity saving throws. Automatic Critical Hits. Any attack roll that hits you is a Critical Hit if the attacker is within 5 feet of you. Unaware. You're unaware of your surroundings. # Unoccupied Space A space is unoccupied if no creatures are in it and it isn't completely filled by objects. Uriuize \[Action\] You normally interact with an object while doing something else, such as when you draw a sword as part of the Attack action. When an object requires an action for its use, you take the Utilize action. VULNERABILITY If you have Vulnerability to a damage type, damage of that type is doubled against you. Vulnerability is applied only once to an instance of damage. See also chapter 1 ("Damage and Healing"). WEAPON A weapon is an object that is in the Simple or Martial weapon category. See also chapter 6 ("Weapons"). | # Weapon Attack A weapon attack is an attack roll made with a weapon. See also "Weapon." Aasimar, 186 A Balanced Party sidebar, 36 A Bard's Repertoire sidebar, 61 abbreviations, 360 Aberrant Sorcery subclass, 145 Aberrant Spirit stat block, 322 Aberration creature type, 364 ability, 10 check, 10, 360 Ability Check Examples table, 11 Ability Descriptions table, 10 ability modifier, 10, 360 determination, 38 Ability Modifiers table, 10 ability score, 10, 360 adjustment, 38 and modifier, 360 assignment, 38 generation, 38 Ability Score Improvement class feature, 53, 61, 71, 81, 92, 103, 111, 120, 130, 141, 155, 167 Ability Score Improvement feat, 202 Ability Score Point Costs table, 38 Ability Scores and Backgrounds table, 36 Ability Scores and Modifiers table, 38 Ability Scores table, 10 Abjure Foes class feature, WwW Abjurer subclass, 172 Abyss, 344 Abyssal language, 37 Abyssal Tiefling, 196 Acheron, 344 Acid, 222 Acid damage, 365 Acid Splash spell, 239 Acolyte background, 178 Acrobatic Movement class feature, 103 Acrobatics skill, 14 action, 15, 360 Attack, 361 Dash, 365 Disengage, 366 Dodge, 366 Help, 368 Hide, 368 Influence, 369 Magic, 371 Ready, 372 Search, 373 Study, 375 Utilize, 377 \_ Action, Bonus, 362 Actions table, 15 Action Surge class feature, 91 Actor feat, 202 adjust ability scores, 38 advancement, level, 41 Advantage, 12, 360 adventure, 8, 360 adventuring gear, 222 Adventuring Gear table, 223 Agonizing Blast invocation, 155 Aid spell, 239 Air, Elemental Plane of, 344 Airborne and Waterborne Vehicles table, 230 Airship, 230 Alarm spell, 239 Alchemist's Fire, 222 Alchemist's Supplies, 220 Alert feat, 200 alignment, 39, 360 ally, 361 Alter Self spell, 239 always-prepared spells, 235 Ambusher's Leap, 125 ammunition, 222 Ammunition property, 13 Ammunition table, 222 Animal Friendship spell, 239 Animal Handling skill, 14 Animal Messenger spell, 240 Animal Shapes spell, 240 Animate Dead spell, 240 Animated Object stat block, 241 Animate Objects spell, 240 Antilife Shell spell, 241 Antimagic Field spell, 241 Antipathy/Sympathy spell, 242 Antitoxin, 222 Ape stat block, 346 appearance, character, 38 Aquan language dialect, 37 Arborea, 344 Arcadia, 344 Arcana skill, 14 Arcane Apotheosis class feature, 141 Arcane Eye spell, 242 Arcane Focus, 224 Arcane Focuses table, 224 Arcane Gate spell, 242 Arcane Lock spell, 242 Arcane Recovery class feature, 166 Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table, 133 Arcane Trickster subclass, 132 Arcane Vigor spell, 242 Archdruid class feature, 82 Archery feat, 209 Archfey Patron subclass, 159 Archfey Spells table, 159 area of effect, 361 Cone, 364 Cube, 364 Glinder, 364 Emanation, 366 Line, 370 Sphere, 374 Areas of Knowledge table, 375 Arid Land circle spells table, 84 aristocratic lifestyle, 231 armor, 219 Armor Class (AC), 12, 41, 361 base, 12 calculating, 12 Armor of Agathys spell, 243 Armor of Shadows invocation, 155 Armor table, 219 armor training, 219, 361 Arms of Hadar spell, 243 Arrow, 222 Artisan background, 178 Artisan's Tools, 220 Ascendant Step invocation, 155 Ash, Para-elemental Plane of, 344 Assassin subclass, 134 assign ability scores, 38 Astral Plane, 344 Astral Projection spell, 243 Athlete feat, 202 Athletics skill, 14 attack, 15, 361 action, 15, 361 making an, 25 melee, 26 Opportunity, 26, 371 ranged, 26 ranged, in close combat, 26 spell, 238 weapon, 377 attack roll, 12, 367 Attack Roll Abilities table, 12 attitude, 361 Friendly, 367 Hostile, 368 Indifferent, 369 Attunement, 232, 361 Augury spell, 244 Aura Expansion class feature, 111 Auran language dialect, 37 Aura of Courage class feature, 111 Aura of Life spell, 244 Aura of Protection class feature, 111 Aura of Purity spell, 244 Aura of Vitality spell, 244 avoiding Opportunity Attacks, 26 Awaken spell, 244 axes, 215 background, character, 177 Backgrounds and Species from Older Books sidebar, 38 Backpack, 224 Badger, Giant, stat block, 350 Badger stat block, 346 bagpipes, 221 Balanced Party, A sidebar, 36 Ball Bearings, 224 Bane spell, 245 Banishing Smite spell, 245 Banishment spell, 245 Barbarian class, 49, 51 Barbarian Features table, 52 Core Barbarian Traits table, 51 subclasses, 54 Bard class, 49, 59 Bard Features table, 60 Core Bard Traits table, 59 spell list, 62 subclasses, 64 Bardic Inspiration class feature, 59 Bardic Inspiration die, 59 barding, 229 Bard's Repertoire, A, sidebar, 61 Barkskin spell, 245 Barrel, 224 base AC, 12 Basic Poison, 227 Basket, 224 Bat stat block, 346 Battleaxe, 215 Battle Master subclass, 93 Beacon of Hope spell, 245 Bear, Black, stat block, 346 Bear, Brown, stat block, 347 Beast creature type, 364 Beastlands, 344 Beast Master subclass, 122 Beast of the Land stat block, 123 Beast of the Sea stat block, 124 Beast of the Sky stat block, 124 Beast Sense spell, 245 Beast Shapes table, 81 Beast Spells class feature, 81 Bedroll, 224 Befuddlement spell, 245 being a player, 7 being the Dungeon Master, 7 Bell, 224 Bestial Spirit stat block, 323 Bestow Curse spell, 246 Bigby's Hand spell, 246 Black Bear stat block, 346 Blade Barrier spell, 247 Blade Ward spell, 247 Blanket, 224 Bless spell, 247 Blessed Strikes class feature, 71 Blight spell, 247 Blinded condition, 361 Blind Fighting feat, 209 Blinding Smite spell, 247 Blindness/Deafness spell, 248 Blindsight, 361 Blink spell, 248 Block and Tackle, 224 Bloodied, 362 Blowgun, 215 blowgun needle. See Needle, 222 Bludgeoning damage, 365 Blur spell, 248 Boar stat block, 347 boats, 230 Body and Mind class feature, 103 Bolt, 222 Bolt Case, Crossbow, 224 Bonus, Proficiency, 11, 13 Bonus Action, 15, 362 Bonus Feats at Level 20 sidebar, 43 Book, 224 Book of Shadows. See Pact of the Tome, 157 Boon of Combat Prowess feat, 210 Boon of Dimensional 'Travel feat, 210 Boon of Energy Resistance feat, 210 Boon of Fate feat, 210 Boor of Fortitude feat, aw "Irresistible nse feat, 211 Boo of Recovery feat, Boon of Skill feat, 211 Boon of Speed feat, 211 Boon of Spell Recall feat, 21 Boon of the Night Spirit feat, 211 Boon of Truesight feat, 211 Bottle, Glass, 224 bows, 215 Branding Smite spell. See Shining Smite, 316 breaking objects, 20, 362 Breaking Your Oath sidebar, 111 Breastplate, 219 Brewer's Supplies, 220 brewing healing potions, 233 brewing Potions of Healing, 233 Bright Light, 19, 362 Brown Bear stat block, 347 Brutal Strike class feature, 53 Bucket, 224 Bullets, 222 Bullseye Lantern, 226 Burglar's Pack, 224 Burning Hands spell, 248 burning hazard, 362 Burrow Speed, 362 Bytopia, 344 calculating AC, 12 Calligrapher's Supplies, 220 Call Lightning spell, 248 Calm Emotions spell, 249 Caltrops, 224 Camel stat block, 347 campaign, 8, 362 Candle, 224 cantrip, 362 capacity, carrying, 362 Carceri, 344 cards, playing, 221 Careful Spell metamagic, 141 cargo, and mount, 229 Carpenter's Tools, 220 Carriage, 230 carrying capacity, 362 Carrying Capacity table, 363 carrying objects, 20 Cart, 230 Cartographer's Tools, 220 Case, Crossbow Bolt, 224 Case, Map or Scroll, 224 Cast a Spell action. See Magic, 15, 371 Casting in Armor sidebar, 235 casting spells, 235 casting time, 236 casting without slots, 235 Cat stat block, 347 Celestial creature type, 364 Celestial language, 37 Celestial Patron subclass, 160 Celestial Spells table, 160 Celestial Spirit stat block, 323 Chain, 224 Chain Lightning spell, 249 Chain Mail, 219 Chain Shirt, 219 Challenge Rating (CR), 363 Champion subclass, 96 Channel Divinity class feature, 70, 110 Chaos, Elemental, 344 Chaotic Evil (CE), 39 Chaotic Good (CG), 39 Chaotic Neutral (CN), 39 character, 7 appearance, 38 background, 177 classes, 49 create a, 33 death/demise, 28 gaining a level, 42 origin, 177 personality, 38 player, 372 species, 177 stabilizing a, 29 Character Advancement table, 41 character creation, 33 ability scores, 38 alignment, 39 class, 33 origin, 36 starting at higher levels, 43 character sheet, 33-35, 363 Charger feat, 202 Chariot, 230 Charisma, 10 Charlatan background, 179 Charmed condition, 363 Charm Monster spell, 249 Charm Person spell, 249 Chef feat, 202 Chest, 225 Chill Touch spell, 249 choose a class, 33 choose an alignment, 39 Chromatic Orb spell, 249 Chthonic Tiefling, 196 Circle of Death spell, 250 Circle of Power spell, 250 Circle of the Land subclass, 84 Circle of the Moon Spells table, 86 Circle of the Moon subclass, 86 Circle of the Sea Spells table, 87 Circle of the Sea subclass, 87 Circle of the Stars subclass, 88 Clairvoyance spell, 250 class, choose a, 33 classes, character, 49 Class Overview table, 33 class spell lists, 236 Cleansing Touch class feature. See Restoring Touch, 111 Cleave mastery property, 214 Cleric class, 49, 69 - /\* 2. Pee Cleric Features abe, Core Cleric Traits table, 69 spell list, 71 subclasses, 73 Climber's Kit, 225 climbing, 363 Climb Speed, 363 Clockwork Sorcery subclass, 146 Clockwork Spells table, 146 Clone spell, 251 Clothes, Fine, 225 Clothes, Traveler's, 225 Cloudkill spell, 251 Cloud of Daggers spell, 251 Club, 215 Cobbler's Tools, 220 coins, 213 Coin Values table, 213 Cold damage, 365 College of Dance subclass, 64 College of Glamour subclass, 65 College of Lore subclass, 66 College of Valor subclass, 67 Color Spray spell, 251 combat, 23 mounted, 26 order of, 23 step by step, 23 underwater, 27 impeded weapons, 27 comfortable lifestyle, 231 Command spell, 251 Common language, 37 Common Sign Language, 37 Commune spell, 252 Commune with Nature spell, 252 Compelled Duel spell, 252 component, 236 Material (M), 237 Somatic (S), 236 Verbal (V), 236 Component Pouch, 225 Comprehend Languages spell, 252 Compulsion spell, 252 Concentration, 363 condition, 29, 363 Blinded, 361 Charmed, 363 Deafened, 365 Exhaustion, 366 Frightened, 367 Grappled, 367 Immunity, 369 Incapacitated, 369 Invisible, 370 Paralyzed, 371 Petrified, 372 Poisoned, 372 Prone, 372 Restrained, 373 Stunned, 376 Unconscious, 377 Cone, area of effect, 364 Cone of Cold spell, 253 Confusion spell, 253 Conjure Animals spell, 254 Conjure Barrage spell, 254 Conjure Celestial spell, 254 Conjure Elemental spell, 254 Conjure Fey spell, 255 Conjure Minor Elementals spell, 255 Conjure Volley spell, 255 Conjure Woodland Beings spell, 255 Constitution, 10 Constrictor Snake stat block, 348 Construct creature type, 364 Construct Spirit stat block, 324 Contact Other Plane spell, 255 Contact Patron class feature, 155 Contagion spell, 256 Contingency spell, 256 Continual Flame spell, 256 controlling a mount, 26 Control Water spell, 256 Control Weather spell, 257 Cook's Utensils, 220 Copper Piece (CP), 213 Cordon of Arrows spell, 258 Core Barbarian Traits table, 51 Core Bard Traits table, 59 Core Cleric Traits table, 69 Core Druid Traits table, 79 Core Fighter Traits table, 71 Core Monk Traits table, 101 Core Paladin Traits table, 109 Core Ranger Traits table, 19 Core Rogue Traits table, 129 Core Sorcerer Traits table, 139 Core Warlock Traits table, 153 Core Wizard Traits table, 165 Costume, 225 Countercharm class feature, 61 Counterspell spell, 258 cover, 25, 364 Cover table, 26 Crab, Giant, stat block, 350 Crab stat block, 348 Crafter feat, 200 crafting equipment, 233 crafting nonmagical items, 233 crawling, 364 create a character, 33 Create Food and Water spell, 258 Create or Destroy Water spell, 258 Create Undead spell, 258 Creating Spell Slots table, 141 Creating Verbal Components sidebar, 237 Creation spell, 259 creature, 364 creature size, 25 Creature Size and Space table, 25 creature stat blocks, 346 creature type, 364 crew, 230 Criminal background, 179 Critical Hit, 27, 364 Crocodile stat block, 348 crossbow bolt. See Bolt, 222 Crossbow Bolt Case, 224 Crossbow Expert feat, 203 crossbows, 215 Crowbar, 225 Crown of Madness spell, 259 Crusader's Mantle spell, 259 Crusher feat, 203 Cube area of effect, 364 Cunning Action class feature, 130 Cunning Strike class feature, 130 Cure Wounds spell, 259 currency, 213 curse, 364 Cylinder area of effect, 364 3,9 4,9 d6,9 d8,9 10,9 12,9 d20,9 20 Test, 9, 10, 364 100, 9 Dagger, 215 damage, 9, 27, 364 against multiple targets, 28 half, 28 healing, 28 Immunity, 369 massive, 28 order of application, 28 Resistance, 373 saving throws and, 28 types, 28, 365 Vulnerability, 377 damage roll, 27, 364 damage threshold, 364 Damage Types table, 365 Dancing Lights spell, 259 Danger Sense class feature, 52 Darkness, 19, 365 Darkness spell, 260 Darkvision, 365 Darkvision spell, 260 Dart, 215 ' Dash action, 15, 365 Daylight spell, 260 Deafened condition, 365. " INDEX death, 365 character, 28 Hit Point maximum of 0, 28 instant, 28 massive damage, 28 monster, 28 Death Saving Throw, 28, 365 Death Ward spell, 261 Deception skill, 14 Deep Speech language, 37 Defense feat, 209 Defensive Duelist feat, 203 Deflect Attacks class feature, 102 Deflect Energy class feature, 103 Deflect Missiles. See Deflect Attacks, 102 Deft Explorer class feature, 120 dehydration hazard, 365 Delayed Blast Fireball spell, 261 Demiplane spell, 261 Destroy Undead class feature. See Sear Undead, 71 Destructive Wave spell, 261 Detect Evil and Good spell, 261 Detect Magic spell, 262 Detect Poison and Disease spell, 262 Detect Thoughts spell, 262 Devil's Sight invocation, 155 Devious Strikes class feature, 131 Devouring Blade invocation, 155 Dexterity, 10 dice, 9 Bardic Inspiration, 59 Martial Arts, 101 notation, 9 percentile, 9 Difficult Terrain, 24, 366 Difficulty Class (DC), 11, 366 Dimension Door spell, 262 Dim Light, 19, 366 Diplomat's Pack, 225 Dire Wolf stat block, 348 Disadvantage, 12, 366 Disciplined Survivor class feature, 103 Disengage action, 15, 366 Disguise Kit, 221 Disguise Self spell, 262 Disintegrate spell, 263 dismounting, 26 Dispel Evil and Good spell, 263 Dispel Magic spell, 264 Dissonant Whispers spell, 264 Distant Spell metamagic, 141 Divination spell, 264 Divine Favor spell, 265 Divine Intervention class feature, 71 Divine Order class feature, 70 Diviner subclass, 173 Divine Smite spell, 265 Divine Word spell, 265 Dodge action, 15, 366 Domain Spells class feature, 73, 74, 75, 77 Dominate Beast spell, 265 Dominate Monster spell, 265 Dominate Person spell, 266 Draconic Ancestors table, 187 Draconic language, 37 Draconic Sorcery subclass, 148 Draconic Spells table, 148 Draconic Spirit stat block, 325 Draft Horse stat block, 349 Dragonborn, 187 dragonchess, 221 Dragon creature type, 364 Dragon's Breath spell, 266 Drawmij's Instant Summons spell, 266 Dream spell, 266 drink, 231 dropping prone, 25 dropping to 0 Hit Points, 28 Drow, 189 Druid class, 49, 79 Core Druid Traits table, 79 Druid Features table, 80 spell list, 82 subclasses, 84 Druidcraft spell, 266 Druidic class feature, 80 Druidic Focus, 225 Druidic Focuses table, 225 Druidic language, 37 drum, 221 Dual Wielder feat, 203 Dueling feat, 209 dulcimer, 221 Dungeoneer's Pack, 225 Dungeon Master, 4, 7 Durable feat, 203 Dwarf, 188 Dwarvish language, 37 Earth, Elemental Plane of, 344 Earthquake spell, 267 Eldritch Blast spell, 267 Eldritch Invocation options, 155 Eldritch Invocations class feature, 153 Eldritch Knight Spelicasting table, 97 Eldritch Knight subclass, 96 Eldritch Master class feature, 155 Eldritch Mind invocation, 155 Eldritch Smite invocation, 155 Eldritch Spear invocation, 155 Electrum Piece (EP), 213 Elemental Adept feat, 203 Elemental Chaos, 344 Elemental creature type, 364 Elemental Fury class feature, 81 Elementalism spell, 267 Elemental Planes, 344 Elemental Spirit stat block, 325 Elemental Weapon spell, 268 Elephant stat block, 349 Elf, 189 Elk stat block, 349 Elusive class feature, 131 Elven Lineages table, 190 Elvish language, 37 Elysium, 344 Emanation area of effect, 366 Empowered Spell metamagic, 142 Empowered Strikes class feature, 103 Empty Body class feature. See Superior Defense, 103 encounter, 366 encumbrance. See carrying capacity, 362 enemy, 366 Enhance Ability spell, 268 Enlarge /Reduce spell, 268 Ensnaring Strike spell, 268 Entangle spell, 268 Entertainer background, 180 Entertainer's Pack, 225 Enthrall spell, 269 Epic Boon class feature, 53, 61, 71, 81, 92, 103, 111, 121, 131, 141, # 155, 167 Epic Boon feats, 210 equipment, 213 crafting, 233 proficiency, 14 Etherealness spell, 269 Ethereal Plane, 344 Evard's Black Tentacles spell, 270 Evasion class feature, 103, 131 Evoker subclass, 174 Exceptions Supersede General Rules sidebar, 8 Exhaustion condition, 366 Expanding and Replacing a Spellbook sidebar, 167 Expeditious Retreat spell, 270 expense, lifestyle, 230 Experience Points (XP), 366 Expertise, 367 Expertise class feature, 60, 121, 129 exploration, 19 Explorer's Pack, 225 Extended Spell metamagic, 142 Extra Attack class feature, 53, 92, 103, 111, 120 Eyebite spell, 270 Fabricate spell, 271 Faerie Fire spell, 271 Faithful Steed class feature, 111 falling hazard, 367 falling off a mount, 27 falling unconscious, 28 False Life spell, 271 Familiar. See Find Familiar, 272 Farmer background, 180 Fast Crafting table, 201 Fast Movement class feature, 53 Favored Enemy class feature, 119 Fear spell, 271 feat, 199 Epic Boon, 210 Fighting Style, 209 General, 202 Origin, 200 Feather Fall spell, 271 Feat List table, 199 Feeblemind spell. See Befuddlement, 245 Feign Death spell, 271 Feral Instinct class feature, 53 Feral Senses class feature, 121 Fey creature type, 364 Fey Spirit stat block, 326 Fey-Touched feat, 204 Fey Wanderer Spells table, 124 Fey Wanderer subclass, 124 Feywild, 344 Feywild Gifts table, 124 Fiend creature type, 364 Fiendish Legacies table, 197 Fiendish Spirit stat block, 327 Fiendish Vigor invocation, 155 Fiend Patron subclass, 161 Fiend Spells table, 161 Fighter class, 49, 91 Core Fighter Traits table, 91 Fighter Features table, 92 subclasses, 93 Fighting Style class feature, 91, 110, 120 Fighting Style feats, 209 Find Familiar spell, 272 finding hidden objects, 20 Find Steed spell, 272 Find the Path spell, 273 Find Traps spell, 273 Fine Clothes, 225 Finesse property, 213 Finger of Death spell, 273 Fire, Elemental Plane of, 344 Firearm Bullet, 222 Fireball spell, 274 Fire Bolt spell, 274 Fire damage, 365 Fire Shield spell, 274 Fire Storm spell, 275 Fixed Hit Points by Class table, 42 Flail, 215 Flame Blade spell, 275 Flame Strike spell, 275 Flaming Sphere spell, 275 Flask, 225 Flesh to Stone spell, 275 Flexible Casting. See Font of Magic, 140 flute, 221 flying, 367 Fly Speed, 367 Fly spell, 276 Focus, Arcane, 224 Focus, Druidic, 225 Focus, Spellcasting, 374 Foe Slayer class feature, 121 Fog Cloud spell, 276 Font of Inspiration class feature, 61 Font of Magic class feature, 140 food, 231 Food, Drink, and Lodging table, 231 Food Needs per Day table, 371 Forbiddance spell, 276 Forcecage spell, 276 Force damage, 365 Foresight spell, 276 Forest Gnome, 191 Forgery Kit, 221 Fount of Moonlight spell, 277 Freedom of Movement spell, 277 Friendly attitude, 367 Friends spell, 277 Frightened condition, 367 Frog stat block, 349 gaining a level, 42 gaining spells, 235 Galley, 230 Gaming Set, 221 Gargantuan, 25 Gaseous Form spell, 277 Gate spell, 277 Gaze of Two Minds invocation, 156 gear, adventuring, 222 Geas spell, 278 Gehenna, 344 General feats, 202 generate ability scores, 38 Gentle Repose spell, 278 Giant Badger stat block, 350 Giant Crab stat block, 350 Giant creature type, 364 Giant Goat stat block, 350 Giant Insect spell, 279 Giant Insect stat block, 279 Giant language, 37 Giant Seahorse stat block, 350 Giant Spider stat block, 351 a \_ eal eee a Giant Weasel stat block, 351 Gift of the Depths invocation, 156 Gift of the Protectors invocation, 156 Glaive, 215 Glassblower's Tools, 220 Glass Bottle, 224 Glibness spell, 279 Globe of Invulnerability spell, 279 Gloom Stalker Spells table, 126 Gloom Stalker subclass, 125 glossary, rules, 360 Glyph of Warding spell, 279 Gnome, 191 Gnomish language, 37 Goat, Giant, stat block, 350 Goat stat block, 351 Goblin language, 37 Gold Piece (GP), 213 Goliath, 192 Goodberry spell, 280 Grappled condition, 367 Grappler feat, 204 grappling, 367 Grappling Hook, 225 Grasping Vine spell, 280 Graze mastery property, 214 Grease spell, 280 Greataxe, 215 Greatclub, 215 Greater Divine Intervention class feature, 71 Greater Invisibility spell, 281 Greater Restoration spell, 281 Great Old One Patron subclass, 162 Great Old One Spells table, 163 Greatsword, 215 Great Weapon Fighting feat, 209 Great Weapon Master feat, 204 Guard background, 181 Guardian of Faith spell, 281 Guards and Wards spell, 282 Guidance spell, 282 Guide background, 181 Guiding Bolt spell, 282 Guild Artisan. See Artisan, 178 Guild Merchant. See Merchant, 182 Gust of Wind spell, 282 Hades, 344 Hail of Thorns spell, 283 Halberd, 215 Half Cover, 26 half damage, 28 Halfling, 193 Halfling language, 37 Half Plate Armor, 219 Hallow spell, 283 Hallucinatory Terrain spell, 283 hammers, 215 Handaxe, 215 Hand Crossbow, 215 Harm spell, 283 Haste spell, 284 Hawk stat block, 352 hazard, 20, 368 burning, 362 dehydration, 365 falling, 367 malnutrition, 371 suffocation, 376 Healer feat, 201 Healer's Kit, 225 healing, 28, 368 damage and, 27 stabilizing a character, 29 Healing, Potion of, 228 Healing Word spell, 284 Heal spell, 284 Heat Metal spell, 284 Heavily Armored feat, 204 Heavily Obscured, 19, 368 Heavy, 213 Heavy armor, 219 Heavy Armor Master feat, 204 Heavy Crossbow, 215 Heavy property, 213 Heightened Focus class feature, 103 Heightened Spell metamagic, 142 Hellish Rebuke spell, 284 Help action, 15, 368 Herbalism Kit, 221 Hermit background, 182 Heroes' Feast spell, 284 Heroic Inspiration, 13, 368 Heroic Inspiration sidebar, 13 Heroism spell, 285 Hex spell, 285 Hide action, 15, 368 Hide Armor, 219 hiding, 19 High Elf, 189 High Jump, 368 hireling, 232 Hirelings table, 232 History skill, 14 Hit, Critical, 27 Hit Dice, 41, 368 Hit Point Dice, 41, 368 Hit Point maximum of 0, 28 Hit Points, 27, 368 dropping to 0, 28 Temporary, 29, 376 Hold Monster spell, 285 Hold Person spell, 286 Holy Aura spell, 286 Holy Symbol, 226 Holy Symbols table, 226 Holy Water, 226 Hooded Lantern, 226 Hook, Grappling, 225 horn, 221 Horse, Draft, stat block, 349 Horse, Riding, stat block, 356 Human, 194 Humanoid creature ape) pe, 364 3 Hunger of Hadar spell, 286 Hunter's Mark spell, 287 Hunter subclass, 127 Hunting Trap, 226 Hypnotic Pattern spell, 287 Ice, Para-elemental Plane of, 344 Ice Knife spell, 287 Ice Storm spell, 287 identifying a magic item, 32 Identifying an Ongoing Spell sidebar, 238 Identify spell, 287 Ignan language dialect, 37 Illusion, 369 Illusionist subclass, 175 Ilusory Script spell, 288 Immunity, 28, 369 impeded weapons, underwater combat, 27 Imprisonment spell, 288 Improved Blessed Strikes class feature, 71 Improved Brutal Strike class feature, 53 Improved Cunning Strike class feature, 131 Improved Divine Smite. See Radiant Strikes, mw Improved Elemental Fury class feature, 81 improvised weapon, 369 Improvised Weapons sidebar, 214 Imp stat block, 352 Incapacitated condition, 369 Incendiary Cloud spell, 288 Indifferent attitude, 369 indomitable class feature, 92 indomitable Might class feature, 53 Infernal language, 37 Infernal Tiefling, 196 Inflict Wounds spell, 288 Influence action, 15, 369 Influence Checks table, 369 Initiative, 23, 369 Initiative order, 23 Ink, 226 Ink Pen, 226 Innate Sorcery class feature, 139 Inner Planes, 344 Insect Plague spell, 289 Insight skill, 14 Inspiration. See Heroic Inspiration, 368 Inspiring Leader feat, 204 instant death, 28 Instinctive Pounce class feature, 53 Instrument, Musical, 221 Intelligence, 10 interacting with objects, 19 interaction, social, 16 Interception feat, 209 Interpreting Die Rolls in the Story sidebar, 9 Intimidation skill, 14 Investigation skill, 14 Investment of the Chain Master invocation, 156 Invisible condition, 370 Invisibility spell, 289 Iron Pot, 228 Iron Spikes, 228 items, 233 crafting nonmagical, wearing, 233 wielding, 233 Jack of All Trades class feature, 60 Jallarzi's Storm of Radiance spell, 289 Javelin, 215 Jeweler's Tools, 220 Jug, 226 Jump, High, 369 Jump, Long, 370 jumping, 370 Jump spell, 290 Keelboat, 230 Keen Mind feat, 205 Ki class feature. See Monk's Focus, 1017 Ki-Empowered Strikes class feature. See Empowered Strikes, 103 ki points. See Monk's Focus, 101 knocking out a creature, 29, 370 Knocking Out a Creature sidebar, 28 Knock spell, 290 Ladder, 226 Lamp, 226 Lance, 215 language, 37 lanterns, 226 Large, 25 Lawful Evil (LE), 39 Lawful Good (LG), 39 Lawful Neutral (LN), 39 Lay On Hands class feature, 109 Leather Armor, 219 Leatherworker's Tools, 220 Legend Lore spell, 290 Leomund's Secret Chest spell, 290 Leomund's Tiny Hut spell, 291 Lesser Restoration spell, 291 Lessons of the First Ones invocation, 156 level advancement, 41 Level 1 Hit Points by Class table, 40 Levitate spell, 291 Life Domain Spells table, 23 Life Domain subclass, 73 Lifedrinker invocation, 156 lifestyle expense, 230 aristocratic, 231 comfortable, 231 modest, 231 poor, 231 squalid, 231 wealthy, 231 wretched, 230 Light, 19 Bright, 19, 362 Dim, 19, 366 Light armor, 219 Light Crossbow, 215 Light Domain Spells table, 74 Light Domain subclass, 74 Light Hammer, 215 Lightly Armored feat, 205 Lightly Obscured, 19, 370 Lightning Arrow spell, 292 Lightning Bolt spell, 292 Lightning damage, 365 Light property, 213 Light spell, 292 Limbo, 344 Line area of effect, 370 Lion stat block, 352 Lizard stat block, 353 Loading property, 214 Locate Animals or Plants spell, 292 Locate Creature spell, 292 Locate Object spell, 293 Lock, 226 lodging, 231 Longbow, 215 Long Jump, 370 Long Rest, 370 Longship, 230 Longstrider spell, 293 Longsword, 215 Lucky feat, 201 lute, 221 lyre, 221 Mace, 215 Mage Armor spell, 293 Mage Hand spell, 293 Mage Slayer feat, 205 Magic action, 15, 371 Magical Cunning class feature, 154 magical effect, 371 Magical Secrets class feature, 61 Magic Circle spell, 293 Magic Initiate feat, 201 magic item, 232 identifying a, 232 Magic Jar spell, 294 Magic Missile spell, 295 Magic Mouth spell, 295 Magic Weapon spell, 29 Magma, Para-elementa Plane of, 344 Magnifying Glass, 226 Mail, Chaii Manacles, 226 Manifestations of Order table, 146 Map, 227 Map Case, 224 Marching Order sidebar, 20 Martial Archetype class feature. See Fighter Subclass, 92 Martial Arts class feature, 101 Martial Melee weapon, 213 Martial Ranged weapon, 213 Martial Weapon Training feat, 205 Mask of Many Faces invocation, 156 Mason's Tools, 221 Mass Cure Wounds spell, 296 Mass Healing Word spell, 296 Mass Heal spell, 296 massive damage, 28 Mass Suggestion spell, 296 Master of Myriad Forms invocation, 156 mastery property, 214 Mastiff stat block, 353 Material component (M), 237 Material Plane, 344 Maul, 215 Maze spell, 296 Mechanus, 344 ine skill, 14 Medium, 25 Medium armor, 219 Medium Armor Master feat, 205 Meld into Stone spell, 296 melee attack, 26 melee attack bonus, 41 Melee weapon, 213 Melf's Acid Arrow spell, 297 Memorize Spell class feature, 167 Mending spell, 297 Merchant background, 182 Message spell, 298 Metamagic class feature, 141 metamagic options, 141 Meteor Swarm spell, 298 Mind Blank spell, 298 Mind Sliver spell, 298 Mind Spike spell, 298 Minor Illusion spell, 298 Mirage Arcane spell, 299 Mirror, 227 Mirror Image spell, 299 Mislead spell, 299 Misty Step spell, 299 Misty Visions invocation, 156 Moderately Armored feat, 205 modest lifestyle, 231 modifier, ability, 10, 360 Modify Memory spell, 299 INDEX Monastic Tradition class feature. See Monk Subclass, 103 Monk class, 49, 101 Core Monk Traits table, 101 Monk Features table, 102 subclasses, 104 Monk's Focus class feature, 101 Monk weapon, 101 monster, 377 monster death, 28 Monstrosity creature type, 364 Moonbeam spell, 300 Mordenkainen's Faithful Hound spell, 300 Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion spell, 300 Mordenkainen's Private Sanctum spell, 307 Mordenkainen's Sword spell, 302 Morningstar, 215 mount, 26, 229 and cargo, 229 controlling a, 26 falling off a, 27 mounting a, 26 travel on a, 20 Mount Celestia, 344 mounted combat, 26 Mounted Combatant feat, 205 Mounts and Other Animals table, 229 Move Earth spell, 302 movement, 24 around other creatures, 25 breaking up your, 26 through Difficult Terrain, 25 Mule stat block, 353 multiclassing, 44 Multiclass Spellcaster: Spell Slots per Spell Level table, 45 multiverse, 344 Musical Instrument, 221 Musician feat, 201 Musket, 215 Mystic Arcanum class feature, 155 Natural Explorer class feature. See Deft Explorer, 120 natural 1, 12 natural 20, 12 Nature skill, 14 Nature's Veil class feature, 121 Nature's Ward table, 85 Navigator's Tools, 221 Necrotic damage, 365 Needle, 222 Net, 227 Neutral (N), 39 Neutral Evil (NE), 39 Neutral Good (NG), 39 Nick mastery property, 214 Nine Hells, 344 Noble background, 183 Nondetection spell, 302 nonplayer character (NPC), 371 Nystul's Magic Aura spell, 302 Oath of Devotion Spells table, 113 Oath of Devotion subclass, 113 Oath of Glory Spells table, 115 Oath of Glory subclass, 14 Oath of the Ancients Spells table, 115 Oath of the Ancients subclass, 115 Oath of Vengeance Spells table, 117 Oath of Vengeance subclass, 116 object, 20, 371 breaking, 20, 362 carrying, 20 finding hidden, 20 interacting with, 19 time-limited, 20 Object Armor Class table, 362 Object Hit Points table, 362 Obscured, Heavily, 19, 368 Obscured, Lightly, 19, 370 obscured area, 19 Observant feat, 205 occupied space, 371 Octopus stat block, 353 Oil, 227 One with Shadows invocation, 156 Ooze, Para-elemental Plane of, 344 Ooze creature type, 364 Opportunity Attack, 26, 371 avoiding an, 26 making an, 26 Orc, 195 Orc language, 37 order of combat, 23 origin, character, 177 origin, determine, 36 Origin feats, 200 Otherworldly Leap invocation, 156 Otherworldly Patron class feature. See Warlock Subclass, 154 Otherworldly Steed stat block, 273 Otiluke's Freezing Sphere spell, 302 Otiluke's Resilient Sphere spell, 303 Otto's Irresistible Dance spell, 303 Outer Planes, 344 Outer Planes table, 344 Outlands, 344 Owl stat block, 354 pace, travel, 20 Pact Magic class feature, 153 Pact of the Blade invocation, 156 Pact of the Chain invocation, 157 Pact of the Tome invocation, 157 Padded Armor, 219 Painter's Supplies, 221 Paladin class, 49, 109 Core Paladin Traits table, 109 Paladin Features table, 110 spell list, 112 subclasses, 113 Paladin's Smite class feature, 110 Pandemonium, 344 pan flute, 221 Panther stat block, 354 Paper, 227 Para-elemental Planes, 344 Paralyzed condition, 371 Parchment, 227 passenger, 230-231 Passive Perception, 40, 372 Passwall spell, 303 Pass without Trace spell, 303 Path of the Berserker subclass, 54 Path of the Totem Warrior subclass. See Path of the Wild Heart, 55 Path of the Wild Heart subclass, 55 Path of the World Tree subclass, 56 Path of the Zealot subclass, 57 Pen, Ink, 226 percentage chances, 9 percentile dice, 9 Perception, Passive, 40, 372 Perception skill, 14 per day, 372 Perfect Focus class feature, 103 Performance skill, 14 Perfume, 227 Persistent Rage class feature, 53 personality, character, 38 Personality Traits by Alignment table, 40 Persuasion skill, 14 Petrified condition, 372 Phantasmal Force spell, 304 Phantasmal Killer spell, 304 Phantom Steed spell, 304 Pick, War, 215 pick locks. See Thieves' Tools, 221 Piercer feat, 206 Piercing damage, 365 Pike, 215 Pistol, 215 Planar Ally spell, 304 Planar Binding spell, 305 Plane, Astral, 344 Plane, Ethereal, 344 Plane, Material, 4 Plane Shift spell, =25 Plant creature type, 364 Plant Growth spell, 305 Plate Armor, 219 Platinum Piece (PP), 213 play, rhythm of, 8 player, being a, 7 player character, 372 playing cards, 221 Playing on a Grid sidebar, 25 point cost ability score generation, 38 Poison, Basic, 227 Poison damage, 365 Poisoned condition, 372 Poisoner feat, 206 Poisoner's Kit, 227 Poison Spray spell, 306 Polar Land circle spells table, 84 Pole, 228 Polearm Master feat, 206 Polymorph spell, 306 Pony stat block, 354 poor lifestyle, 231 Portable Ram, 228 position, 24 possession, 372 Pot, Iron, 228 Potion of Healing, 228 Potter's Tools, 221 Pouch, 228 Pouch, Component, 225 Power Word Fortify spell, 306 Power Word Heal spell, 306 Power Word Kill spell, 306 Power Word Stun spell, 306 Prayer of Healing spell, 307 Precise Hunter class feature, 121 preparing spells, 235 Prestidigitation spell, 307 Priest's Pack, 228 Primal Champion class feature, 53 Primal Knowledge class feature, 52 Primal Order class feature, 80 Primal Path class feature. See Barbarian Subclass, 52 Primordial language, 37 Prismatic Spray spell, 307 Prismatic Wall spell, 308 Produce Flame spell, 308 proficiency, 13, 372 equipment, 14 saving throw, 14 skill, 13 tool, 220 weapon, 213 Proficiency Bonus, 13 Proficiency Bonus table, 13 Programmed Illusion spell, 309 Project Image spell, 309 prone, dropping, 25 Prone condition, 372 property, weapon, 213 Protection feat, 209 Protection from Energy spell, 309 Protection from Evil and Good spell, 309 Protection from Poison spell, 310 Pseudodragon stat block, 354 Psionic Power class feature, 98 Psionic Spells table, 145 Psi Warrior Energy Dice table, 98 Psi Warrior subclass, 98 Psychic damage, 365 punching. See Unarmed Strike, 377 Purify Food and Drink spell, 310 Push mastery property, 214 Quarterstaff, 215 Quasit stat block, 355 Quickened Spell metamagic, 142 Quiver, 228 race. See character species, 177 Radiant damage, 365 Radiant Strikes class feature, 111 Rage class feature, 51 Raise Dead spell, 310 Ram, Portable, 228 random generation, ability score, 38 random tables, 9 range, 26 spell, 236 ranged attack, 26 in close combat, 26 ranged attack bonus, 41 Ranged weapon, 213 Range property, 214 Ranger class, 49, 119 Core Ranger Traits table, 119 Ranger Features table, 120 spell list, 121 subclasses, 122 Rapier, 215 Rare Languages table, 37 Rary's Telepathic Bond spell, 311 Rations, 228 Rat stat block, 355 Raven stat block, 355 Ray of Enfeeblement spell, 311 Ray of Frost spell, 311 Ray of Sickness spell, 311 reach, 26 Reach property, 214 Reaction, 15, 372 Ready action, 15, 372 Reckless Attack class feature, 52 recovering ammunition. See ammunition, 213 Reef Shark stat block, 356 refitting plate armor. See equipment sizes, 219 Regenerate spell, 311 Reincarnate spell, 311 Relentless Hunter class feature, 121 Relentless Rage class feature, 53 Reliable Talent class feature, 131 Religion skill, 14 Remove Curse spell, 312 Repelling Blast invocation, 157 Resilient feat, 206 Resistance, 28, 373 Resistance spell, 312 Rest, Long, 370 Rest, Short, 373 Resting sidebar, 27 Restoring Touch class feature, 111 Restrained condition, 373 Resurrection spell, 312 Reverse Gravity spell, 312 Revivification, 57 Revivify spell, 312 rhythm of play, 8 Riding Horse stat block, 356 Ring Mail, 219 Ritual, 373 Ritual Adept class feature, 166 Ritual Caster feat, 206 Robe, 228 Rock Gnome, 191 Rogue class, 49, 129 Core Rogue Traits table, 129 Rogue Features table, 130 subclasses, 132 roleplaying, 16 Rope, 228 Rope Trick spell, 312 round down, 373 Round Down sidebar, 8 Roving class feature, 121 Rowboat, 230 tules glossary, 360 Sack, 228 Sacred Flame spell, 313 Sacred Oath class feature. See Paladin Subclass, 111 Sacred Weapon class feature, 113 saddles, 229-230 Sage background, 183 Sailing Ship, 230 Sailor background, 184 Sanctuary spell, 313 Sap mastery property, 214 Savage Attacker feat, 201 save, 373 saving throw, 11, 373 and damage, 28 proficiency, 14 spell, 238 Saving Throw, Death, 29 Saving Throw Examples table, 12 Scale Mail, 219 Scholar class feature, 166 Scholar's Pack, 228 Schools of Magic table, 236 Scimitar, 215 ing Ray spell, 313 Scab See 356 Scribe background, 184 scribing Spell Scrolls, 233 Scroll, Spell, 228 Scroll Case, 224 Scrying spell, 313 Seahorse, Giant, stat block, 350 Search action, 15, 373 Search table, 373 Searing Smite spell, 314 Sear Undead class feature, 71 Second Wind class feature, 91 See Invisibility spell, 314 Seeking Spell metamagic, 142 Seeming spell, 314 Self-Restoration class feature, 103 Selling Equipment sidebar, 213 Sending spell, 314 senses, special, 19 Sentinel feat, 207 Sequester spell, 315 services, 230 Session Zero sidebar, 33 Shadowfell, 344 Shadow-Touched feat, 207 Shapechange spell, 315 shape-shifting, 373 Shark, Reef, stat block, 356 Sharpshooter feat, 207 Shatter spell, 316 shawm, 221 Shield, 219 Shield Master feat, 207 Shield of Faith spell, 316 Shield spell, 316 Shillelagh spell, 316 Shining Smite spell, 316 ships, 230 Shocking Grasp spell, 316 Shortbow, 215 Short Rest, 373 Shortsword, 215 Shovel, 228 shoving. See Unarmed Strike, 377 Sickle, 215 Sigil, 344 Signal Whistle, 228 Signature Spells class feature, 167 Silence spell, 316 Silent Image spell, 317 Silver Piece (SP), 213 Simple Melee weapon, 213 Simple Ranged weapon, 213 Simulacrum spell, 317 simultaneous effects, 374 size, 25, 374 Skeleton stat block, 356 skill, 374 proficiency, 13 Skilled feat, 201 Skill Expert feat, 207 Skills table, 14 Skills with Different Abilities sidebar, 14 Skulker feat, 208 Slaad Tadpole stat block, 357 Slasher feat, 208 Slashing damage, 365 Sled, 230 Sleep spell, 317 Sleet Storm spell, 317 Sleight of Hand skill, 14 Sling, 215 Sling Bullet, 222 Slippery Mind class feature, 131 Slow spell, 318 Slow Fall class feature, 103 Slow mastery property, 214 Small, 25 Smith's Tools, 221 Snake, Constrictor, stat block, 348 Snake, Venomous, stat block, 358 Sneak Attack class feature, 129 social interaction, 16 Soldier background, 185 Somatic component (S), 236 Sorcerer class, 49, 139 Core Sorcerer Traits table, 139 Sorcerer Features table, 140 spell list, 142 subclasses, 145 Sorcerous Burst spell, 318 Sorcerous Restoration class feature, 141 Sorcery Incarnate class feature, 141 Sorcery Points, 141 Soulknife Energy Dice table, 135 Soulknife subclass, 135 space, occupied, 371 space, unoccupied, 377 Spare the Dying spell, 318 Speak with Animals spell, 318 Speak with Dead spell, 318 Speak with Plants spell, 319 Spear, 215 special senses, 19 species, character, 177 Speed, 374 Burrow, 362 Climb, 363 Fly, 367 Swim, 376 Speedy feat, 208 spell, 374 always-prepared, 235 attack, 374 attack modifier, 238 casting, 235 casting time, 236 casting without slots, components, 236 Material (M), 237 Somatic (S), 236 Verbal (V), 236 descriptions, 239 duration, 237 effects, 237 gaining, 235 level, 235 preparing, 235 range, 236 save DC, 238 saving throw, 238 slots, 235 using a higher-level spell slot, 236 Spellcasting class feature, 59, 69, 79, 109, 119, 139, 165 Spellcasting Focus, 374 Spellcasting Services table, 232 spell list, Bard, 62 spell list, Cleric, 71 spell list, Druid, 82 spell list, Paladin, 112 spell list, Ranger, 121 spell list, Sorcerer, 142 spell list, Warlock, 157 spell list, Wizard, 168 spell lists, class, 236 Spell Mastery class feature, 167 Spell Preparation by Class table, 235 spells, 235 Spell Scroll, 228 Spell Scroll, scribing, 233 Spell Scroll Costs table, 233 Spell Sniper feat, 208 Sphere area of effect, 374 Sphinx of Wonder stat block, 357 Spider Climb spell, 319 Spider, Giant, stat block, 351 Spider stat block, 357 Spike Growth spell, 319 Spikes, ron, 228 Spirit Guardians spell, 319 Spiritual Weapon spell, 319 Splint Armor, 219 Sprite stat block, 358 Spyglass, 229 squalid lifestyle, 231 squeezing. See Difficult Terrain, 24, 366 stabilizing a character, 29 Stable, 374 Staggering Smite spell, 320 standard array, ability score generation, 38 Standard Array by Class table, 38 Standard Languages table, 37 Star Map table, 88 Starry Wisp spell, 320 starting at higher levels, 43 Starting Equipment at Higher Levels table, 43 starvation. See malnutrition, 371 stat block, 374 stat blocks, creature, 346 INDEX 3 vision and light, 19 wielding items, 233 Tremorsense, 377 Visions of Distant Realms Wild Companion class Telekinetic feat, 208 ady Aim class feature, 3 See Telepathic feat, 208 Trickery Domain Spells s: par Stealth skill, 14 telepathy, 376 table, 75 invocation, 157 feature, Stee! Wind Strike spell, Telepathy spell, 331 Trickery Domain Vitriolic Sphere spell, 337 Wild Magic Sorcery 320 teleportation, 376 subclass, 75 Vulnerability, 377 subclass, 149 Stillness of Mind class Teleportation Circle spell, Trident, 215 damage, 28 Wild Magic Surge table, feature. See Self- 332 trinkets, 46 Wagon, 230 150 Restoration, 103 Teleport spell, 331 Trinkets table, 46 Wall of Fire spell, 338 Wild Resurgence class Stinking Cloud spell, 321 Temperate Land circle Tropical Land circle spells Wall of Force spell, 338 feature, 81 Stone Shape spell, 321 spells table, 85 table, 85 Wall of ice spell, 339 Wild Shape class feature, True Polymorph spell, 335 Wall of Stone spell, 339 380 Stoneskin spell, 321 Temporary Hit Points, Gf Ver, 376. True Resurrection spell, Wall of Thorns spell, 339 Wind Walk spell, 341 Storm of Vengeance spell, 29, 376 321 Tenser's Floating Disk 336 War Caster feat, 209 Wind Wall spell, 341 Strength, 10 spell, 332 True Seeing spell, 336 Warding Bond spell, 340 Wisdom, 10 String, 229 Tent, 229 Truesight, 377 War Domain Spells table, Wish spell, 341 Stroke of Luck class Terran language dialect, True Strike spell, 336 77 Witch Bolt spell, 343 feature, 131 37 Tsunami spell, 336 War Domain subclass, 76 Witch Sight invocation, Studded Leather Armor, Thaumaturgy spell, 333 Turn Undead. See Warhammer, 215 157 219 Thief subclass, 137 Channel Divinity, 70 Warhorse stat block, 359 Wizard class, 49, 165 Studied Attacks class Thieves' Cant class Twinned Spell Warlock class, 49, 153 Core Wizard Traits feature, 92 feature, 129 metamagic, 142 Core Warlock Traits table, 165 Study action, 15, 375 Thieves' Cant language, Two Extra Attacks class table, 153 spell list, 168 Stunned condition, 376 37 feature, 92 spell list, 157 subclasses, 172 Stunning Strike class Thieves' Tools, 221 Two-Handed property, subclasses, 159 Wizard Features table, feature, 103 Thirsting Blade 214 Warlock Features table, 166 Subtle Spell metamagic, invocation, 157 Two-Weapon Fighting 154 Wolf, Dire, stat block, 348 feat, 210 War Pick, 215 Wolf stat block, 359 142 Thorn Whip spell, 333 Typical Difficulty Classes Warrior of Mercy Woodcarver's Tools, 221 Wood Elf, 189 suffocation hazard, 376 Suggestion spell, 321 Three Extra Attacks class table, 17 Summon Aberration spell, feature, 92 Unaligned Creatures Warrior of Shadow Word of Radiance spell, 322 Three-Quarters Cover, 26 sidebar, 39 subclass, 105 Summon Beast spell, 322. Thrown property, 214 Unarmed Fighting feat, Warrior of the Elements Word of Recall spell, 343 Summon Celestial spell, Thrown Weapon Fighting 210 subclass, 106 Words of Creation class 323 feat, 210 Unarmed Strike, 377 Warrior of the Open feature, 61 Summon Construct spell, Thunderclap spell, 333 Unarmored Defense class Hand subclass, 107 Wrathful Smite spell, 343 324 Thunder damage, 365 feature, 51, 101 Warship, 230 wretched lifestyle, 230 Summon Dragon spell, Thunderous Smite spell, Unarmored Movement Water, Elemental Plane Yolande's Regal Presence 324 334 class feature, 102 of, 344 spell, 343 Summon Elemental spell, Thunderwave spell, 334 Uncanny Dodge class Water, Holy, 226 Ysgard, 344 325 Tiefling, 196 feature, 131 Water Breathing spell, 340 0 Hit Points, dropping Summon Fey spell, 326 tiers of play, 43 Uncanny Metabolism Water Needs per Day to, 28 class feature, 102 table, 365 Zombie stat block, 359 Summon Fiend spell, 326 Summon Undead spell, 328 Sunbeam spell, 329 Sunburst spell, 329 Superior Defense class feature, 103 Superior Inspiration class feature, 61 surprise, 23, 376 Survival skill, 14 Swift Quiver spell, 329 swimming, 376 Swim Speed, 376 swords, 215 Sylvan language, 37 Symbol spell, 329 Synaptic Static spell, 330 tables, random, 9 Tack, Harness, and Drawn Vehicles table, 230 Tactical Master class feature, 92 Tactical Mind class feature, 91 Tactical Shift class feature, 92 target, 376 Tasha's Bubbling Cauldron spell, 330 Tasha's Hideous Laughter spell, 331 Tavern Brawler feat, 202 Telekinesis spell, 331 INDEX three-dragon ante, 221 Tiger stat block, 358 Timeless Body class feature. See Self- Restoration, 103 time-limited object interaction, 20 Time Stop spell, 334 Tinderbox, 229 Tinker's Tools, 221 Tiny, 25 Tireless class feature, 121 Toll the Dead spell, 334 Tongues spell, 334 tool proficiency, 220 tools, 220 Topple mastery property, 214 Torch, 229 Total Cover, 26 Tough feat, 202 transitive planes, 344 Transmuted Spell metamagic, 142 Transport via Plants spell, 334 Trap, Hunting, 226 traps, finding, removing, disabling. See Thieves' Tools, 221 travel, 20, 231 Traveler's Clothes, 225 travel pace, 20 Travel Pace table, 20 Travel table, 231 Tree Stride spell, 335 unconscious, falling, 28 Unconscious condition, 377 Undead creature type, 364 Undead Spirit stat block, 328 Undercommon language, 37 underwater combat, 27 unoccupied space, 377 Unseen Attackers and Targets sidebar, 26 Unseen Servant spell, 336 Use an Object. See Utilize, 15, 377 using a higher-level spell slot, 236 Utilize action, 15, 377 Vampiric Touch spell, 337 Vanish class feature. See Nature's Veil, 121 Variant: Equipment Sizes sidebar, 219 vehicle, 20, 229 Venomous Snake stat block, 358 Verbal component (V), 236 Versatile property, 214 Vex mastery property, 214 Vial, 229 Vicious Mockery spell, 337 viol, 221 subclass, 104 Waterskin, 229 Water Walk spell, 340 Wayfarer background, 185 wealthy lifestyle, 237 weapon, 213, 377 attack, 377 improvised, 369 Martial, 213 mastery property, 214 Melee, 213 Monk, 101 proficiency, 213 property, 213 Ranged, 213 Simple, 213 Weapon Master feat, 209 Weapon Mastery class feature, 52, 91, 110, 120, 129 Weapons table, 215 wearing items, 233 Weasel, Giant, stat block, 351 Weasel stat block, 359 Weaver's Tools, 221 Web spell, 340 Weird spell, 341 What Would Your Character Do? sidebar, 15 Whip, 215 Whispers of the Grave invocation, 157 Whistle, Signal, 228 Zone of Truth spell, 343 ALEJANDRO PACHECO ow