# Becoming A Fighter... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Fighter Traits table. - Gain the Fighter's level 1 features, which are listed in the Fighter Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the following traits from the Core Fighter Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency with Mar- tial weapons, and training with Light and Medium armor and Shields. - Gain the Fighter's level 1 features, which are listed in the Fighter Features table. # Fighter Class Features As a Fighter, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Fighter levels. These features are listed on the Fighter Features table. LEVEL 1: FIGHTING STYLE You have honed your martial prowess and gain a Fighting Style feat of your choice (see chapter 5). Defense is recommended. Whenever you gain a Fighter level, you can re- place the feat you chose with a different Fighting Style feat. LEvEL 1: SECOND WIND You have a limited well of physical and mental stamina that you can draw on. As a Bonus Action, you can use it to regain Hit Points equal to 1d10 plus your Fighter level. You can use this feature twice. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. When you reach certain Fighter levels, you gain more uses of this feature, as shown in the Second Wind column of the Fighter Features table. LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of three kinds of Simple or Mar- tial weapons of your choice. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can practice weapon drills and change one of those weapon choices. When you reach certain Fighter levels, you gain the ability to use the mastery properties of more kinds of weapons, as shown in the Weapon Mastery column of the Fighter Features table. LEVEL 2: ACTION SURGE You can push yourself beyond your normal limits for a moment. On your turn, you can take one addi- tional action, except the Magic action. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. Starting at level 17, you can use it twice before a rest but only once ona turn. LEVEL 2: TACTICAL MIND You have a mind for tactics on and off the battle- field. When you fail an ability check, you can ex- pend a use of your Second Wind to push yourself toward success, Rather than regaining Hit Points, you roll 1d10 and add the number rolled to the abil- ity check, potentially turning it into a success. If the check still fails, this use of Second Wind isn't expended, # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 91 FIGHTER FEATURES Second Weapon Proficiency Wind Mastery Level Bonus Class Features 1 +2 Fighting Style, Second Wind, Weapon Mastery 2 3 2 +2 Action Surge (one use), Tactical Mind 2 3 3 +2 Fighter Subclass 2 3 4 42 Ability Score Improvement 3 4 5 +3 Extra Attack, Tactical Shift 3 4 6 +3 Ability Score Improvement 3 4 7 +3 Subclass feature 3 4 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 3 4 9 +4 Indomitable (one use), Tactical Master 3 4 10 +4 Subclass feature 4 5 un +4 Two Extra Attacks 4 5 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 4 5 13 +5 Indomitable (two uses), Studied Attacks 4 5 14 +5 Ability Score Improvement 4 5 15 +5 Subclass feature 4 5 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 4 6 7 +6 Action Surge (two uses), Indomitable (three uses) 4 6 18 +6 Subclass feature 4 6 19 +6 Epic Boon 4 6 20 +6 Three Extra Attacks 4 6 LEVEL 3: FIGHTER SUBCLASS You gain a Fighter subclass of your choice. The Battle Master, Champion, Eldritch Knight, and Psi Warrior subclasses are detailed after this class's de- scription. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Fighter levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's fea- tures that are of your Fighter level or lower. LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Fighter levels 6, 8, 12, 14, and 16. LeveL 5: EXTRA ATTACK You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. LEVEL 5: TACTICAL SHIFT Whenever you activate your Second Wind with a Bonus Action, you can move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks. LEVEL 9: INDOMITABLE If you fail a saving throw, you can reroll it with a bonus equal to your Fighter level. You must use the new roll, and you can't use this feature again until you finish a Long Rest. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES You can use this feature twice before a Long Rest starting at level 13 and three times before a Long Rest starting at level 17. LEVEL 9: TACTICAL MASTER When you attack with a weapon whose mastery property you can use, you can replace that prop- erty with the Push, Sap, or Slow property for that attack. LEVEL 11: Two ExTRA ATTACKS You can attack three times instead of once when- ever you take the Attack action on your turn. LEvEL 13: SruDIED ATTACKS You study your opponents and learn from each at- tack you make. If you make an attack roll against a creature and miss, you have Advantage on your next attack roll against that creature before the end of your next turn. LEVEL 19: EPIC BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Combat Prowess is recommended. LEVEL 20: THREE EXTRA ATTACKS You can attack four times instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. # Fighter Subclasses A Fighter subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Battle Mas- ter, Champion, Eldritch Knight, and Psi Warrior subclasses. BATTLE MASTER Master Sophisticated Battle Maneuvers Battle Masters are students of the art of battle, learning martial techniques passed down through generations. The most accomplished Battle Masters are well-rounded figures who combine their care- fully honed combat skills with academic study in the fields of history, theory, and the arts. LEVEL 3: COMBAT SUPERIORITY Your experience on the battlefield has refined your fighting techniques. You learn maneuvers that are fueled by special dice called Superiority Dice. # A Fighter Stands Between An # Ally And The Onslaught Of A Black Oragon Maneuvers. You learn three maneuvers of your choice from the "Maneuver Options" section later in this subclass's description. Many maneuvers en- hance an attack in some way. You can use only one maneuver per attack. You learn two additional maneuvers of your choice when you reach Fighter levels 7, 10, and 15. Each time you learn new maneuvers, you can also replace one maneuver you know with a different one. Superiority Dice. You have four Superiority Dice, which are d8s. A Superiority Die is expended when you use it. You regain all expended Superiority Dice when you finish a Short or Long Rest. You gain an additional Superiority Die when you reach Fighter levels 7 (five dice total) and 15 (six dice total). Saving Throws. If a maneuver requires a saving throw, the DC equals 8 plus your Strength or Dex- terity modifier (your choice) and Proficiency Bonus. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 93 Barrie Masteg Suscrass LEVEL 3: STUDENT OF WAR You gain proficiency with one type of Artisan's Tools of your choice, and you gain proficiency in one skill of your choice from the skills available to Fighters at level 1. LEvEL 7: KNOW YOUR ENEMY Asa Bonus Action, you can discern certain strengths and weaknesses of a creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself; you know whether that creature has any Immunities, Resistances, or Vul- nerabilities, and if the creature has any, you know what they are. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore a use of the feature by expending one Superiority Die (no action required). LEVEL 10: IMPROVED COMBAT SUPERIORITY Your Superiority Die becomes a d10. LEVEL 15: RELENTLESS Once per turn, when you use a maneuver, you can roll 1d8 and use the number rolled instead of ex- pending a Superiority Die. LEVEL 18: ULTIMATE COMBAT SUPERIORITY Your Superiority Die becomes a d12. MANEUVER OPTIONS The maneuvers are presented here in alphabetical order. Ambush. When you make a Dexterity (Stealth) check or an Initiative roll, you can expend one Superiority Die and add the die to the roll, unless you have the Incapacitated condition. Bait and Switch. When you're within 5 feet of a creature on your turn, you can expend one Supe- riority Die and switch places with that creature, provided you spend at least 5 feet of movement and the creature is willing and doesn't have the Inca- pacitated condition. This movement doesn't pro- voke Opportunity Attacks. Roll the Superiority Die. Until the start of your next turn, you or the other creature (your choice) gains a bonus to AC equal to the number rolled. Commander's Strike. When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can replace one of your attacks to direct one of your companions to strike. When you do so, choose a willing creature who can see or hear you and expend one Superiority Die. That creature can immediately use its Reaction to make one attack with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike, adding the Superiority Die to the attack's damage roll on a hit. Commanding Presence. When you make a Cha- risma (Intimidation, Performance, or Persuasion) check, you can expend one Superiority Die and add that die to the roll. Disarming Attack. When you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can expend one Superiority Die to attempt to disarm the target. Add the Superiority Die roll to the attack's damage roll. The target must succeed on a Strength saving throw or drop one ob- ject of your choice that it's holding, with the object landing in its space. Distracting Strike. When you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can expend one Superiority Die to distract the target. Add the Superiority Die roll to the attack's damage roll. The next attack roll against the target by an attacker other than you has Advantage if the attack is made before the start of your next turn. Evasive Footwork. As a Bonus Action, you can expend one Superiority Die and take the Disengage action. You also roll the die and add the number rolled to your AC until the start of your next turn. Feinting Attack. As a Bonus Action, you can ex- pend one Superiority Die to feint, choosing one creature within 5 feet of yourself as your target. You have Advantage on your next attack roll against that target this turn. If that attack hits, add the Superiority Die to the attack's damage roll. Goading Attack. When you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can expend one Superiority Die to attempt to goad the target into attacking you. Add the Superiority Die to the attack's damage roll. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have Disadvantage on attack rolls against targets other than you until the end of your next turn. Lunging Attack. As a Bonus Action, you can ex- pend one Superiority Die and take the Dash action. If you move at least 5 feet in a straight line imme- diately before hitting with a melee attack as part of the Attack action on this turn, you can add the Superiority Die to the attack's damage roll. Maneuvering Attack. When you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can expend one Superiority Die to maneuver one of your comrades into another position. Add the Superiority Die roll to the attack's damage roll, and choose a willing creature who can see or hear you. That creature can use its Reaction to move up to half its Speed without provoking an Opportunity Attack from the target of your attack. Menacing Attack. When you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can expend one Superiority Die to attempt to frighten the target. Add the Supe- riority Die to the attack's damage roll. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition until the end of your next turn. Parry. When another creature damages you with a melee attack roll, you can take a Reaction and ex- pend one Superiority Die to reduce the damage by the number you roll on your Superiority Die plus your Strength or Dexterity modifier (your choice). Precision Attack. When you miss with an attack roll, you can expend one Superiority Die, roll that die, and add it to the attack roll, potentially causing the attack to hit. Pushing Attack. When you hit a creature with an attack roll using a weapon or an Unarmed Strike, you can expend one Superiority Die to attempt to drive the target back. Add the Superiority Die to the attack's damage roll. If the target is Large or smaller, it must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed up to 15 feet directly away from you. Rally. As a Bonus Action, you can expend one Su- periority Die to bolster the resolve of a companion. Choose an ally of yours within 30 feet of yourself who can see or hear you. That creature gains Temporary Hit Points equal to the Superiority Die roll plus half your Fighter level (round down). Riposte. When a creature misses you with a melee attack roll, you can take a Reaction and expend one Superiority Die to make a melee attack roll with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike against the creature. If you hit, add the Superiority Die to the attack's damage. Sweeping Attack. When you hit a creature with a melee attack roll using a weapon or an Unarmed Strike, you can expend one Superiority Die to attempt to damage another creature. Choose another creature within 5 feet of the original target and within your reach. If the original attack roll would hit the second creature, it takes damage equal to the number you roll on your Superiority Die. The dam- age is of the same type dealt by the original attack. Tactical Assessment. When you make an Intelli- gence (History or Investigation) check or a Wisdom (Insight) check, you can expend one Superiority Die and add that die to the ability check. Trip Attack. When you hit a creature with an attack roll using a weapon or an Unarmed Strike, you can expend one Superiority Die and add the die to the attack's damage roll. If the target is Large or smaller, it must succeed on a Strength saving throw or have the Prone condition. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 95 CHAMPION Suscrass CHAMPION \_\_\_ = Pursue Physical Excellence in Combat A Champion focuses on the development of martial prowess in a relentless pursuit of victory. Champi- ons combine rigorous training with physical excel- lence to deal devastating blows, withstand peril, and garner glory. Whether in athletic contests or bloody battle, Champions strive for the crown of the victor, LEVEL 3: IMPROVED CRITICAL Your attack rolls with weapons and Unarmed Strikes can score a Critical Hit on a roll of 19 or 20 on the d20. LEVEL 3: REMARKABLE ATHLETE Thanks to your athleticism, you have Advantage on Initiative rolls and Strength (Athletics) checks. In addition, immediately after you score a Critical Hit, you can move up to half your Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks. LEVEL 7: ADDITIONAL FIGHTING STYLE You gain another Fighting Style feat of your choice. LEVEL 10: HEROIC WARRIOR The thrill of battle drives you toward victory. During combat, you can give yourself Heroic Inspi- ration whenever you start your turn without it. LEVEL 15: SUPERIOR CRITICAL Your attack rolls with weapons and Unarmed Strikes can now score a Critical Hit on a roll of 18-20 on the d20. LEVEL 18: SURVIVOR You attain the pinnacle of resilience in battle, giving you these benefits. Defy Death. You have Advantage on Death Saving Throws. Moreover, when you roll 18-20 on a Death Saving Throw, you gain the benefit of rolling a 20 on it. Heroic Rally. At the start of each of your turns, you regain Hit Points equal to 5 plus your Constitu- tion modifier if you are Bloodied and have at least 1 Hit Point. ELDRITCH KNIGHT Support Combat Skills with Arcane Magic Eldritch Knights combine the martial mastery com- mon to all Fighters with a careful study of magic. Their spells both complement and extend their com- bat skills, providing additional protection to shore up their armor and also allowing them to engage many foes at once with explosive magic. EVEL 3: SPELLCASTING You have learned to cast spells. See chapter 7-for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as an Eldritch Knight. Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Wizard spell list (see that class's section for its list). Ray of Frost and Shocking Grasp are rec- ommended. Whenever you gain a Fighter level, you can replace one of these cantrips with another can- trip of your choice from the Wizard spell list. When you reach Fighter level 10, you learn an- other Wizard cantrip of your choice. Spell Slots. The Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. # Eldritch Knight Spellcasting Fighter Spells ---Spell Slots per Spell Level--- Level Prepared 1 2 3 4 3 3 2 ---*--- --- = 4 4 3 = oa = C9 4 3* ---*--- 6 4 3 --- ---*--- --- 7 b 4 2 --- = 8 6 4 2 \_ = 9 6 4 2 \_ = 10 7 4 3 \_ = a} 8 4 3 \_ *--- 12 8 4 3* --- 13 9 4 3 2 *14 10 4 3 2* 15 10 4 3 2 --- 16 i 4 3 3 --- W7 nN 4 3 3 = 18 am 4 3 3 \_ 19 12 4 3 3 1 20 13 4 # 3 3 1 Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose three level 1 spells from the Wizard spell list. Burning Hands, Jump, and Shield are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Fighter levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Eldritch Knight Spellcasting table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Wizard spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 7 \*" EvoritcH KNIGHT Susciass Fighter, your list of prepared spells can coe five Wizard spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Fighter level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Wizard spell for which you have spell slots.; Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcast- ing ability for your Wizard spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Wizard spells. LEVEL 3: WAR BOND You learn a ritual that creates a magical bond be- tween yourself and one weapon. You perform the ritual over the course of 1 hour, which can be done during a Short Rest. The weapon must be within your reach throughout the ritual, at the conclusion of which you touch the weapon and forge the bond. The bond fails if another Fighter is bonded to the weapon or if the weapon is a magic item to which someone else is attuned. Once you have bonded a weapon to yourself, you can't be disarmed of that weapon unless you have the Incapacitated condition, If it is on the same plane of existence, you can summon that weapon as a Bonus Action, causing it to teleport instantly to your hand. You can have up to two bonded weapons, but you can summon only one at a time with a Bonus Ac- tion. If you attempt to bond with a third weapon, you must break the bond with one of the other two. LEVEL 7: WAR Macic When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can replace one of the attacks with a casting of one of your Wizard cantrips that has a casting time of an action. LEVEL 10: ELDRITCH STRIKE You learn how to make your weapon strikes un- dercut a creature's ability to withstand your spells. When you hit a creature with an attack using a weapon, that creature has Disadvantage on the next saving throw it makes against a spell you cast be- fore the end of your next turn. LEVEL 15: ARCANE CHARGE When you use your Action Surge, you can tele- port up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. You can teleport before or after the additional action. LEVEL 18: IMPROVED WAR MAGIC When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can replace two of the attacks with a casting of one of your level 1 or level 2 Wizard spells that has a casting time of an action. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Pst WARRIOR \_: £52 eS Augment Physical Might with Psionic Power Psi Warriors awaken the power of their minds to augment their physical might. They harness this psionic power to infuse their weapon strikes, lash out with telekinetic energy, and create barriers of mental force. LEVEL 3: PSIONIC POWER You harbor a wellspring of psionic energy within yourself. It is represented by your Psionic Energy Dice, which fuel powers you have from this sub- class. The Psi Warrior Energy Dice table shows the die size and number of these dice you have when you reach certain Fighter levels. Psi Warrior Enercy Dice Fighter Level Die Size Number 3 Dé 4 5 D3 6 9 D8 8 u DIO 8 13 D10 10 17 # D2 12 Any features in this subclass that use a Psionic En- ergy Die use only the dice from this subclass. Some of your powers expend the Psionic Energy Die, as specified in a power's description, and you can't use a power if it requires you to use a die when all your Psionic Energy Dice are expended. You regain one of your expended Psionic Energy Dice when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all of them when you finish a Long Rest. Protective Field. When you or another creature you can see within 30 feet of you takes damage, you can take a Reaction to expend one Psionic Energy Die, roll the die, and reduce the damage taken by the number rolled plus your Intelligence modifier (minimum reduction of 1), as you create a momen- tary shield of telekinetic force. Psionic Strike. You can propel your weapons with psionic force. Once on each of your turns, immedi- ately after you hit a target within 30 feet of yourself with an attack and deal damage to it with a weapon, you can expend one Psionic Energy Die, rolling it and dealing Force damage to the target equal to the number rolled plus your Intelligence modifier. Telekinetic Movement. You can move an object ora creature with your mind. As a Magic action, choose one target you can see within 30 feet of yourself; the target must be a loose object that is Large or smaller or one willing creature other than you. You transport the target up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Alternatively, if the target is a Tiny object, you can transport it to or from your hand. Once you take this action, you can't do so again until you finish a Short or Long Rest unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it. LEVEL 7: TELEKINETIC ADEPT You have mastered new ways to use your telekinetic abilities, detailed below. Psi-Powered Leap. As a Bonus Action, you gain a Fly Speed equal to twice your Speed until the end of the current turn. Once you take this Bonus Action, you can't do so again until you finish a Short or Long Rest unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it. Telekinetic Thrust. When you deal damage to a target with your Psionic Strike, you can force the target to make a Strength saving throw (DC 8 plus your Intelligence modifier and Proficiency Bonus). On a failed save, you can give the target the Prone condition or transport it up to 10 feet horizontally. LEVEL 10: GUARDED MIND You have Resistance to Psychic damage. Moreover, if you start your turn with the Charmed or Fright- ened condition, you can expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) and end every effect on yourself giving you those conditions. LEVEL 15: BULWARK OF FORCE You can shield yourself and others with telekinetic force. As a Bonus Action, you can choose creatures, including yourself, within 30 feet of yourself, up to anumber of creatures equal to your Intelligence modifier (minimum of one creature). Each of the chosen creatures has Half Cover for 1 minute or un- til you have the Incapacitated condition. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it. LEVEL 18: TELEKINETIC MASTER You always have the Telekinesis spell prepared. With this feature, you can cast it without a spell slot or components, and your spellcasting ability for it is Intelligence. On each of your turns while you maintain Concentration on it, including the turn when you cast it, you can make one attack with a weapon as a Bonus Action. Once you cast the spell with this feature, you can't do so in this way again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it. Psi Warrior Susciass # ------ J t Core MONK TRAITS \>\| Primary Ability Hit Point Die Saving Throw Proficiencies Dexterity and Wisdom D8 per Monk level Strength and Dexterity \| | Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: Acrobatics, Athlet- ics, History, Insight, Religion, or Stealth \| Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons and Martial \| weapons that have the Light Property Choose one type of Artisan's Tools or Musical Instrument (see chapter 6) None Choose A or B: (A) Spear, 5 Daggers, Artisan's Tools or Musical Instrument cho- sen for the tool proficiency above, Explorer's Pack, and \ GP; or (B) 50 GP th iinet ONKS USE RIGOROUS COMBAT TRAINING M and mental discipline to align themselves \| with the multiverse and focus their inter- nal reservoirs of power. Different Monks conceptu- alize this power in various ways: as breath, energy, life force, essence, or self, for example. Whether channeled as a striking display of martial prowess or as a subtler manifestation of defense and speed, this power infuses all that a Monk does. Monks focus their internal power to create ex- traordinary, even supernatural, effects. They chan- nel uncanny speed and strength into their attacks, with or without the use of weapons. In a Monk's hands, even the most basic weapons can become so- phisticated implements of combat mastery. Many Monks find that a structured life of ascetic withdrawal helps them cultivate the physical and mental focus they need to harness their power. Other Monks believe that immersing themselves in the vibrant confusion of life helps to fuel their de- termination and discipline. Monks generally view adventures as tests of their physical and mental development. They are driven by a desire to accomplish a greater mission than merely slaying monsters and plundering treasure; = they strive to turn themselves into living weapons. Tool Proficiencies Armor Training Starting Equipment AVS # Joshua Raphael ae # Becoming A Monk... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Monk Traits table. H - Gain the Monk's level 1 features, which are listed in the Monk Features table. # As A Multiclass Character - Gain the Hit Point Die trait from the Core Monk Traits table. - Gain the Monk's level 1 features, which are listed in the Monk Features table. Monk CLAss FEATURES As a Monk, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Monk levels. These features are listed in the Monk Features table. LEVEL 1: MARTIAL ARTS Your practice of martial arts gives you mastery of combat styles that use your Unarmed Strike and Monk weapons, which are the following: - Simple Melee weapons - Martial Melee weapons that have the Light property You gain the following benefits while you are un- \| armed or wielding only Monk weapons and you \| aren't wearing armor or wielding a Shield. \| Bonus Unarmed Strike. You can make an Unarmed \| Strike as a Bonus Action. Martial Arts Die. You can roll 1d6 in place of the normal damage of your Unarmed Strike or Monk weapons. This die changes as you gain Monk levels, as shown in the Martial Arts column of the Monk Features table. Dexterous Attacks. You can use your Dexterity modifier instead of your Strength modifier for the attack and damage rolls of your Unarmed Strikes and Monk weapons. In addition, when you use the Grapple or Shove option of your Unarmed Strike, you can use your Dexterity modifier instead of your Strength modifier to determine the save DC. LEVEL 1: UNARMORED DEFENSE While you aren't wearing armor or wielding a Shield, your base Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Wisdom modifiers. LEVEL 2: MONK's Focus Your focus and martial training allow you to har- « ness a well of extraordinary energy within yourself. = This energy is represented by Focus Points. Your =. Monk level determines the number of points you have, as shown in the Focus Points column of theMonk Features table. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES tnr MONK FEATURES Martial Focus Unarmored Level Bea Class Features oe piles sis 1 42 Martial Arts, Unarmored Defense bs r =) 2 +2 Monk's Focus, Unarmored Movement, i Uncanny Metabolism 3 +2 Deflect igual Monk Subclass 1d6 iz} +10 ft. 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement, Slow Fall 1d6 4 +10 ft. 3 +3 Extra Attack, Stunning Strike 1d8 5 +10 ft, 6 43 Empowered Strikes, Subclass feature 1d8 6 +15 ft. 7 43 Evasion 1d 7 +15 ft. 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 1d8 8 +15 ft. 9 +4 Acrobatic Movement 1d8 9: +15 ft. 10 +4 Heightened Focus, Self-Restoration 1d8 10 +20 ft. u +4 Subclass feature 1d10 n +20 ft. 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 1d10 12 +20 ft. 13 +5 Deflect Energy 1410 13 +20 ft. 14 +5 Disciplined Survivor 1d10 14 +25 ft. 15 +5 Perfect Focus 1d10 15 +25 ft. 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 1d10 16 +25 ft. 7 +6 Subclass feature 1d12 7 +25 ft. 18 +6 Superior Defense 1d12 18 +30 ft. 19 +6 Epic Boon 1d12 19 +30 ft. 20 +6 Body and Mind 1d12 20 +30 ft. You can expend these points to enhance or fuel certain Monk features. You start knowing three such features: Flurry of Blows, Patient Defense, and Step of the Wind, each of which is detailed below. When you expend a Focus Point, it is unavailable until you finish a Short or Long Rest, at the end of which you regain all your expended points. Some features that use Focus Points require your target to make a saving throw. The save DC equals 8 plus your Wisdom modifier and Proficiency Bonus. Flurry of Blows. You can expend 1 Focus Point to make two Unarmed Strikes as a Bonus Action. Patient Defense. You can take the Disengage ac- tion as a Bonus Action. Alternatively, you can ex- pend 1 Focus Point to take both the Disengage and the Dodge actions as a Bonus Action. Step of the Wind. You can take the Dash action as a Bonus Action. Alternatively, you can expend 1 Focus Point to take both the Disengage and Dash actions as a Bonus Action, and your jump distance is doubled for the turn. LeveL 2: UNARMORED MOVEMENT Your speed increases by 10 feet while you aren't wearing armor or wielding a Shield. This bonus increases when you reach certain Monk levels, as shown on the Monk Features table. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES LEVEL 2: UNCANNY METABOLISM When you roll Initiative, you can regain all ex- pended Focus Points. When you do so, roll your Martial Arts die, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to your Monk level plus the number rolled. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 3: DEFLECT ATTACKS When an attack roll hits you and its damage in- cludes Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing damage, you can take a Reaction to reduce the attack's total damage against you. The reduction equals 1d10 plus your Dexterity modifier and Monk level. If you reduce the damage to 0, you can expend 1 Focus Point to redirect some of the attack's force. If you do so, choose a creature you can see within 5 feet of yourself if the attack was a melee attack or a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself that isn't behind Total Cover if the attack was a ranged attack. That creature must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take damage equal to two rolls of your Martial Arts die plus your Dexterity modifier. The damage is the same type dealt by the attack. 1. Gh 3: Mons SUBCLASS Yo:. gain a Monk subclass of your choice. The Warrior of Mercy, Warrior of Shadow, Warrior of the Elements, and Warrior of the Open Hand subclasses are detailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Monk levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Monk level or lower. LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Monk levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 4: SLOW FALL You can take a Reaction when you fall to reduce any damage you take from the fall by an amount equal to five times your Monk level. LEVEL 5: ExTRA ATTACK You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. LEVEL 5: STUNNING STRIKE Once per turn when you hit a creature with a Monk weapon or an Unarmed Strike, you can expend 1 Focus Point to attempt a stunning strike. The target must make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the target has the Stunned condition until the start of your next turn. On a successful save, the target's Speed is halved until the start of your next turn, and the next attack roll made against the tar- get before then has Advantage. LEVEL 6: EMPOWERED STRIKES Whenever you deal damage with your Unarmed Strike, it can deal your choice of Force damage or its normal damage type. LEVEL 7: EVASION When you're subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw and only half damage if you fail. You don't benefit from this feature if you have the Incapacitated condition. LEVEL 9: ACROBATIC MOVEMENT While you aren't wearing armor or wielding a Shield, you gain the ability to move along vertical surfaces and across liquids on your turn without falling during the movement. LeveL 10: HEIGHTENED Focus Your Flurry of Blows, Patient Defense, and Step of the Wind gain the following benefits. Flurry of Blows. You can expend 1 Focus Point to use Flurry of Blows and make three Unarmed Strikes with it instead of two. Patient Defense. When you expend a Focus Point to use Patient Defense, you gain a number of Tem- porary Hit Points equal to two rolls of your Martial Arts die. Step of the Wind. When you expend a Focus Point to use Step of the Wind, you can choose a willing creature within 5 feet of yourself that is Large or smaller. You move the creature with you until the end of your turn. The creature's movement doesn't provoke Opportunity Attacks. LEVEL 10: SELF-RESTORATION Through sheer force of will, you can remove one of the following conditions from yourself at the end of each of your turns: Charmed, Frightened, or Poisoned. In addition, forgoing food and drink doesn't give you levels of Exhaustion. LEVEL 13: DEFLECT ENERGY You can now use your Deflect Attacks feature against attacks that deal any damage type, not just Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing. LEVEL 14: DISCIPLINED SURVIVOR Your physical and mental discipline grant you profi- ciency in all saving throws. Additionally, whenever you make a saving throw and fail, you can expend 1 Focus Point to reroll it, and you must use the new roll. LEVEL 15: PERFECT Focus When you roll Initiative and don't use Uncanny Me- tabolism, you regain expended Focus Points until you have 4 if you have 3 or fewer. LEVEL 18: SUPERIOR DEFENSE At the start of your turn, you can expend 3 Focus Points to bolster yourself against harm for 1 min- ute or until you have the Incapacitated condition. During that time, you have Resistance to all damage except Force damage. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Irresistible Offense is recommended. LEVEL 20: Bopy AND MIND You have developed your body and mind to new heights. Your Dexterity and Wisdom scores increase by 4, toa maximum of 25. Ps CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 4 10} Warrior or Mercy Susciass MONK SUBCLASSES A Monk subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain levels, as specified in the sub- class. This section presents the Warrior of Mercy, Warrior of Shadow, Warrior of the Elements, and Warrior of the Open Hand subclasses. # Warrior Of Mercy Manipulate Forces of Life and Death Warriors of Mercy manipulate the life force of others. These Monks are wandering physicians, but they bring a swift end to their enemies. They often wear masks, presenting themselves as faceless bringers of life and death. LEvEL 3: HAND OF HARM Once per turn when you hit a creature with an Unarmed Strike and deal damage, you can expend 1 Focus Point to deal extra Necrotic damage equal to one roll of your Martial Arts die plus your Wisdom modifier. LEVEL 3: HAND OF HEALING As a Magic action, you can expend 1 Focus Point to touch a creature and restore a number of Hit Points equal to a roll of your Martial Arts die plus your Wisdom modifier. When you use your Flurry of Blows, you can re- place one of the Unarmed Strikes with a use of this feature without expending a Focus Point for the healing. LEVEL 3: IMPLEMENTS OF MERCY You gain proficiency in the Insight and Medicine skills and proficiency with the Herbalism Kit. LEVEL 6: PHYSICIAN's TOUCH Your Hand of Harm and Hand of Healing improve, as detailed below. Hand of Harm. When you use Hand of Harm on a creature, you can also give that creature the Poi- soned condition until the end of your next turn. Hand of Healing. When you use Hand of Healing, you can also end one of the following conditions on the creature you heal: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed, Poisoned, or Stunned. LeveL 1\]: FLURRY OF HEALING AND HARM When you use Flurry of Blows, you can replace each of the Unarmed Strikes with a use of Hand of Healing without expending Focus Points for the healing. In addition, when you make an Unarmed Strike with Flurry of Blows and deal damage, you can use Hand of Harm with that strike without expending a Focus Point for Hand of Harm. You can still use Hand of Harm only once per turn. You can use these benefits a total number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. LeveL 17: HAND OF ULTIMATE MERCY Your mastery of life energy opens the door to the ultimate mercy. As a Magic action, you can touch the corpse of a creature that died within the past 24 hours and expend 5 Focus Points. The creature then returns to life with a number of Hit Points equal to 4d10 plus your Wisdom modifier. If the creature died with any of the following conditions, the crea- ture revives with the conditions removed: Blinded, Deafened, Paralyzed, Poisoned, and Stunned. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. WARRIOR OF SHADOW Harness Shadow Power for Stealth and Subterfuge Warriors of Shadow practice stealth and subter- fuge, harnessing the power of the Shadowfell. They are at home in darkness, able to draw gloom around themselves to hide, leap from shadow to shadow, and take on a wraithlike form. LEVEL 3: SHADOW ARTS You have learned to draw on the power of the Shadowfell, gaining the following benefits. Darkness. You can expend 1 Focus Point to cast the Darkness spell without spell components. You can see within the spell's area when you cast it with this feature. While the spell persists, you can move its area of Darkness to a space within 60 feet of yourself at the start of each of your turns. Darkvision. You gain Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision, its range increases by 60 feet. Shadowy Figments. You know the Minor Illusion spell. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for it. LEVEL 6: SHADOW STEP While entirely within Dim Light or Darkness, you can use a Bonus Action to teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can see that is also in Dim Light or Darkness. You then have Advantage on the next melee attack you make before the end of the current turn. LEVEL 11: IMPROVED SHADOW STEP You can draw on your Shadowfell connection to empower your teleportation. When you use your Shadow Step, you can expend 1 Focus Point to re- move the requirement that you must start and end in Dim Light or Darkness for that use of the feature. As part of this Bonus Action, you can make an Un- armed Strike immediately after you teleport. LEVEL 17: CLOAK OF SHADOWS Asa Magic action while entirely within Dim Light or Darkness, you can expend 3 Focus Points to shroud yourself with shadows for 1 minute, until you have the Incapacitated condition, or until you end your turn in Bright Light. While shrouded by these shadows, you gain the following benefits. Invisibility. You have the Invisible condition. Partially Incorporeal. You can move through occu- pied spaces as if they were Difficult Terrain. If you end your turn in such a space, you are shunted to the last unoccupied space you were in. Shadow Flurry. You can use your Flurry of Blows without expending any Focus Points.