# Eldritch Invocation Options Eldritch Invocation options appear in alphabetical order. # Agonizing Blast Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock, a Warlock Cantrip That Deals Damage Choose one of your known Warlock cantrips that deals damage. You can add your Charisma modifier to that spell's damage rolls. Repeatable. You can gain this invocation more than once. Each time you do so, choose a different eligible cantvip. # Armor Of Shadows You can cast Mage Armor on yourself without ex- pending a spell slot. # Ascendant Step Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock You can cast Levitate on yourself without expending a spell slot. DEVIL's SIGHT Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock You can see normally in Dim Light and Darkness--- both magical and nonmagical---within 120 feet of yourself. DEVOURING BLADE Prerequisite: Level 12+ Warlock, Thirsting Blade Invocation The Extra Attack of your Thirsting Blade invoca- tion confers two extra attacks rather than one. # Eldritch Mind You have Advantage on Constitution saving throws that you make to maintain Concentration. # Eldritch Smite Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock, Pact of the Blade Invocation Once per turn when you hit a creature with your pact weapon, you can expend a Pact Magic spell slot to deal an extra 1d8 Force damage to the target, plus another 1d8 per level of the spell slot, and you can give the target the Prone condition if it is Huge or smaller. # Eldritch Spear Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock, a Warlock Cantrip That Deals Damage Choose one of your known Warlock cantrips that deals damage and has a range of 10+ feet. When you cast that spell, its range increases by a number of feet equal to 30 times your Warlock level. Repeatable. You can gain this invocation more than once. Each time you do so, choose a different eligible cantrip. FIENDISH VIGOR Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock You can cast False Life on yourself without expend- ing a spell slot. When you cast the spell with this feature, you don't roll the die for the Temporary Hit Points; you automatically get the highest number on the die. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES a el ---lee 56) Gaze OF Two MINDS Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock You can use a Bonus Action to touch a willing creature and perceive through its senses until the end of your next turn. As long as the creature is on the same plane of existence as you, you can takea Bonus Action on subsequent turns to maintain this connection, extending the duration until the end of your next turn. The connection ends if you don't maintain it in this way. While perceiving through the other creature's senses, you benefit from any special senses pos- sessed by that creature, and you can cast spells as if you were in your space or the other creature's space if the two of you are within 60 feet of each other. GIFT OF THE DEPTHS Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock You can breathe underwater, and you gain a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. You can also cast Water Breathing once without expending a spell slot. You regain the ability to cast it in this way again when you finish a Long Rest. GIFT OF THE PROTECTORS Prerequisite: Level 9+ Warlock, Pact of the Tome Invocation A new page appears in your Book of Shadows when you conjure it. With your permission, a creature can take an action to write its name on that page, which can contain a number of names equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one name). When any creature whose name is on the page is reduced to O Hit Points but not killed outright, the creature magically drops to 1 Hit Point instead. Once this magic is triggered, no creature can bene- fit from it until you finish a Long Rest. As a Magic action, you can erase a name on the page by touching it. INVESTMENT OF THE CHAIN MASTER Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock, Pact of the Chain Invocation When you cast Find Familiar, you infuse the summoned familiar with a measure of your eldritch power, granting the creature the following benefits. Aerial or Aquatic. The familiar gains either a Fly Speed or a Swim Speed (your choice) of 40 feet. Quick Attack. As a Bonus Action, you can com- mand the familiar to take the Attack action. Necrotic or Radiant Damage. Whenever the famil- iar deals Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing damage, you can make it deal Necrotic or Radiant damage instead. Your Save DC. If the familiar forces a creature to make a saving throw, it uses your spell save DC. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Resistance. When the familiar takes damage, you can take a Reaction to grant it Resistance against that damage. # Lessons Of The First Ones Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock You have received knowledge from an elder entity of the multiverse, allowing you to gain one Origin feat of your choice (see chapter 5). Repeatable. You can gain this invocation more than once. Each time you do so, choose a different Origin feat. LIFEDRINKER Prerequisite: Level 9+ Warlock, Pact of the Blade Invocation Once per turn when you hit a creature with your pact weapon, you can deal an extra 1d6 Necrotic, Psychic, or Radiant damage (your choice) to the creature, and you can expend one of your Hit Point Dice to roll it and regain a number of Hit Points equal to the roll plus your Constitution modifier (minimum of 1 Hit Point). MASK OF Many FACES Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock You can cast Disguise Self without expending a spell slot. MASTER OF MyRIAD FoRMS Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock You can cast Alter Self without expending a spell slot. # Misty Visions Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock You can cast Silent Image without expending a spell slot. # One With Shadows Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock While you're in an area of Dim Light or Darkness, you can cast Invisibility on yourself without expend- ing a spell slot. OTHERWORLDLY LEAP Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock You can cast Jump on yourself without expending a spell slot. # Pact Of The Blade Asa Bonus Action, you can conjure a pact weapon in your hand---a Simple or Martial Melee weapon of your choice with which you bond---or create a bond with a magic weapon you touch; you can't bond with a magic weapon if someone else is attuned to it or another Warlock is bonded with it. Until the ---, g eligible cantrip. 1 OO ------------ Py oe bond ends, you have proficiency with the weapon, and you can use it as a Spellcasting Focus. Whenever you attack with the bonded weapon, you can use your Charisma modifier for the at- tack and damage rolls instead of using Strength or Dexterity; and you can cause the weapon to deal Necrotic, Psychic, or Radiant damage or its normal damage type. Your bond with the weapon ends if you use this feature's Bonus Action again, if the weapon is more than 5 feet away from you for 1 minute or more, or if you die. A conjured weapon disappears when the bond ends. PACT OF THE CHAIN You learn the Find Familiar spell and can cast it as a Magic action without expending a spell slot. When you cast the spell, you choose one of the normal forms for your familiar or one of the fol- lowing special forms: Imp, Pseudodragon, Qua- sit, Skeleton, Slaad Tadpole, Sphinx of Wonder, Sprite, or Venomous Snake (see appendix B for the familiar's stat block). Additionally, when you take the Attack action, you can forgo one of your own attacks to allow your familiar to make one attack of its own with its Reaction. # Pact Of The Tome Stitching together strands of shadow, you conjure forth a book in your hand at the end of a Short or Long Rest. This Book of Shadows (you determine its appearance) contains eldritch magic that only you can access, granting you the benefits below. The book disappears if you conjure another book with this feature or if you die. Cantrips and Rituals. When the book appears, choose three cantrips, and choose two level 1 spells that have the Ritual tag. The spells can be from any class's spell list, and they must be spells you don't already have prepared. While the book is on your person, you have the chosen spells prepared, and they function as Warlock spells for you. Spellcasting Focus. You can use the book as a Spellcasting Focus. REPELLING BLAST Prerequisite: Level 2+ Warlock, a Warlock Cantrip That Deals Damage via an Attack Roll Choose one of your known Warlock cantrips that requires an attack roll. When you hit a Large or smaller creature with that cantrip, you can push the creature up to 10 feet straight away from you. Repeatable. You can gain this invocation more than once. Each time you do so, choose a different THIRSTING BLADE Prerequisite: Level 5+ Warlock, Pact of the Blade Invocation You gain the Extra Attack feature for your pact weapon only. With that feature, you can attack twice with the weapon instead of once when you take the Attack action on your turn. VisIONS OF DISTANT REALMS Prerequisite: Level 9+ Warlock You can cast Arcane Eye without expending a spell slot. WHISPERS OF THE GRAVE Prerequisite: Level 7+ Warlock You can cast Speak with Dead without expending a spell slot. WITCH SIGHT Prerequisite: Level 15+ Warlock You have Truesight with a range of 30 feet. WARLOCK SPELL List This section presents the Warlock spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alpha- betized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Special column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. CANTRIPS (LEVEL O WARLOCK SPELLS) Spell School Special Blade Ward Abjuration Cc Chill Touch Necromancy Eldritch Blast Evocation ---- Friends Enchantment (Ss Mage Hand Conjuration *Mind Sliver Enchantment --- Minor Illusion Illusion* Poison Spray Necromancy es \<\<\< lle > » 58 Spell Prestidigitation Thunderclap Toll the Dead True Strike LeveL 1 WARLOCK SPELLS Spell Armor of Agathys Arms of Hadar Bane Charm Person Comprehend Languages Detect Magic Expeditious Retreat Hellish Rebuke Hex Illusory Script Protection from Evil and Good Speak with Animals Tasha's Hideous Laughter Unseen Servant Witch Bolt LeveL 2 WARLOCK SPELLS Spell Cloud of Daggers Crown of Madness Darkness Enthrall Hold Person Invisibility Mind Spike Mirror Image Misty Step Ray of Enfeeblement Spider Climb Suggestion # Level 3 Warlock Spells Spell Counterspell Dispel Magic Fear Fly School Special Transmutation --- Evocation --- Necromancy = Divination = School Special Abjuration =--- Conjuration *Enchantment Cc Enchantment* Divination R Divination CR Transmutation Cc Evocation = Enchantment Cc Illusion R,M Abjuration c,M Divination R Enchantment Cc Conjuration R Evocation Cc School Special Conjuration Cc Enchantment c Evocation G Enchantment (ef Enchantment Cc Illusion ie Divination Cc Illusion --- *Conjuration* --- Necromancy c Transmutation G Enchantment Cc School Special Abjuration \_ Abjuration --- Mlusion ¢ Transmutation (es # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Spell Gaseous Form Hunger of Hadar Hypnotic Pattern Magic Circle Major Image Remove Curse Summon Fey Summon Undead Tongues Vampiric Touch # Level 4 Warlock Spells Spell Banishment Blight Charm Monster Dimension Door Hallucinatory Terrain Summon Aberration # Level 5 Warlock Spells Spell Contact Other Plane Dream Hold Monster Jallarzi's Storm of Radiance Mislead Planar Binding Scrying Synaptic Static Teleportation Circle School Transmutation Conjuration Illusion Abjuration Illusion Abjuration Conjuration Necromancy Divination Necromancy School Abjuration Necromancy Enchantment Conjuration Illusion Conjuration School Divination Illusion Enchantment Evocation Illusion Abjuration Divination Enchantment Conjuration LeveL 6 WARLOCK SPELLS Spell Arcane Gate Circle of Death Create Undead Eyebite Summon Fiend Tasha's Bubbling Cauldron True Seeing School Conjuration Necromancy Necromancy Necromancy Conjuration Conjuration Divination Special Cc Af AA c,M cM Special Cc Special R Zaan c,M Special Cc Q=ZEz C,M Leve 7 WARLOCK SPELLS Spell School Special Etherealness Conjuration = Finger of Death Necromancy = Forcecage Evocation CM Plane Shift Conjuration M Lever 8 # Warlock Spells Spell School Special Befuddlement Enchantment = Demiplane Conjuration ee Dominate Monster Enchantment Cc Glibness Enchantment --- Power Word Stun Enchantment \_ LeveL 9 WARLOCK SPELLS Spell School Special Astral Projection Necromancy M Foresight Divination = Gate Conjuration cM Imprisonment Abjuration M Power Word Kill Enchantment \_ True Polymorph Transmutation € Weird Illusion (2 # Warlock Subclasses A Warlock subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Warlock levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Archfey Patron, Celestial Patron, Fiend Patron, and Great Old One Patron subclasses. ARCHFEY PATRON Bargain with Whimsical Fey Your pact draws on the power of the Feywild. When you choose this subclass, you might make a deal with an archfey, such as the Prince of Frost; the Queen of Air and Darkness, ruler of the Gloaming Court; Titania of the Summer Court; or an ancient hag. Or you might call on a spectrum of Fey, weav- ing a web of favors and debts. Whoever they are, your patron is often inscrutable and whimsical. LEVEL 3: ARCHFEY SPELLS The magic of your patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Archfey Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. ARCHFEY SPELLS Warlock Level Spells 3 Calm Emotions, Faerie Fire, Misty; Step, Phantasmal Force, Sleep 5 Blink, Plant Growth Dominate Beast, Greater Invisibility Dominate Person, Seeming LeveL 3: STEPS OF THE FEY Your patron grants you the ability to move between the boundaries of the planes. You can cast Misty Step without expending a spell slot a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. In addition, whenever you cast that spell, you can choose one of the following additional effects. Refreshing Step. Immediately after you teleport, you or one creature you can see within 10 feet of yourself gains 1d10 Temporary Hit Points. Taunting Step. Creatures within 5 feet of the space you left must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC or have Disadvantage on attack rolls against creatures other than you until the start of your next turn. LEVEL 6: Misty ESCAPE You can cast Misty Step as a Reaction in response to taking damage. In addition, the following effects are now among your Steps of the Fey options. Disappearing Step. You have the Invisible condi- tion until the start of your next turn or until imme- diately after you make an attack roll, deal damage, or cast a spell. Dreadful Step. Creatures within 5 feet of the space you left or the space you appear in (your choice) must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC or take 2d10 Psychic damage. LEVEL 10: BEGUILING DEFENSES Your patron teaches you how to guard your mind and body. You are immune to the Charmed condition. In addition, immediately after a creature you can see hits you with an attack roll, you can take a Reac- tion to reduce the damage you take by half (round down), and you can force the attacker to make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the attacker takes Psychic damage equal to the damage you take. Once you use this Reaction, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Pact Magic spell slot (no action required) to restore your use of it. TER 3 \| CHARACTER CLASSES LEVEL 14; BEWITCHING MAGIC Your patron grants you the ability to weave your magic with teleportation. Immediately after you cast an Enchantment or Illusion spell using an ac- tion and a spell slot, you can cast Misty Step as part of the same action and without expending a spell slot. CELESTIAL PATRON \_ Call on the Power of the Heavens Your pact draws on the Upper Planes, the realms of everlasting bliss. You might enter an agreement with an empyrean, a couatl, a sphinx, a unicorn, or another heavenly entity. Or you might call on numerous such beings as you pursue goals aligned with theirs. Your pact allows you to experience a hint of the holy light that illuminates the multiverse. LEVEL 3: CELESTIAL SPELLS The magic of your patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Celestial Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. CELESTIAL SPELLS Warlock Level Spells 3 Aid, Cure Wounds, Guiding Bolt, Lesser Restoration, Light, Sacred Flame 5 Daylight, Revivify 7 Guardian of Faith, Wall of Fire 9 Greater Restoration, Summon Celestial LEVEL 3: HEALING LIGHT You gain the ability to channel celestial energy to heal wounds. You have a pool of d6s to fuel this healing. The number of dice in the pool equals 1 plus your Warlock level. As a Bonus Action, you can heal yourself or one creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself, expending dice from the pool. The maximum num- ber of dice you can expend at once equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of one die). Roll the dice you expend, and restore a number of Hit Points equal to the roll's total. Your pool regains all ex- pended dice when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 6: RADIANT SOUL Your link to your patron allows you to serve as a conduit for radiant energy. You have Resistance to Radiant damage. Once per turn, when a spell you cast deals Radiant or Fire damage, you can add your Charisma modifier to that spell's damage against one of the spell's targets. LEVEL 10: CELESTIAt RESILIENCE You gain Temporary Hit Points whenever you use your Magical Cunning feature or finish a Short or Long Rest. These Temporary Hit Points equal your Warlock level plus your Charisma modifier. Additionally, choose up to five creatures you can see when you gain the points. Those creatures each gain Temporary Hit Points equal to half your War- lock level plus your Charisma modifier. LEVEL 14: SEARING VENGEANCE When you or an ally within 60 feet of you is about to make a Death Saving Throw, you can unleash ra- diant energy to save the creature. The creature re- gains Hit Points equal to half its Hit Point maximum and can end the Prone condition on itself. Each creature of your choice that is within 30 feet of the creature takes Radiant damage equal to 2d8 plus your Charisma modifier, and each has the Blinded condition until the end of the current turn. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. FIEND PATRON Make a Deal with the Lower Planes Your pact draws on the Lower Planes, the realms of perdition. You might forge a bargain with a demon lord such as Demogorgon or Orcus; an archdevil such as Asmodeus; or a pit fiend, balor, yugoloth, or night hag that is especially mighty. That patron's aims are evil---the corruption or destruction of all things, ultimately including you---and your path is defined by the extent to which you strive against those aims. LEVEL 3: DARK ONE'S BLESSING When you reduce an enemy to 0 Hit Points, you gain Temporary Hit Points equal to your Charisma modifier plus your Warlock level (minimum of 1 Temporary Hit Point). You also gain this benefit if someone else reduces an enemy within 10 feet of you to O Hit Points. LEVEL 3: FIEND SPELLS The magic of your patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Fiend Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. FIEND SPELLS Warlock Level Spells 3 Burning Hands, Command, Scorching Ray, Suggestion 3 Fireball, Stinking Cloud 7 Fire Shield, Wall of Fire 9 Geas, Insect Plague Cevestiat Patron Susciass Fieno Patron Susciass LEVEL 6: DARK ONE'S OWN Luck You can call on your fiendish patron to alter fate in your favor. When you make an ability check ora saving throw, you can use this feature to add 1d10 to your roll. You can do so after seeing the roll but before any of the roll's effects occur. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), but you can use it no more than once per roll. You re- gain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 10: FIENDISH RESILIENCE Choose one damage type, other than Force, when- ever you finish a Short or Long Rest. You have Resistance to that damage type until you choose a different one with this feature. LEVEL 14: HURL THROUGH HELL Once per turn when you hit a creature with an attack roll, you can try to instantly transport the target through the Lower Planes. The target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw against your spell save DC, or the target disappears and hurtles through a nightmare landscape. The target takes 8d10 Psychic damage if it isn't a Fiend, and it has the Incapacitated condition until the end of your next turn, when it returns to the space it previously occupied or the nearest unoccupied space. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Pact Magic spell slot (no action required) to restore your use of it. GREAT OLD ONE PATRON Unearth Forbidden Lore of Ineffable Beings When you choose this subclass, you might bind yourself to an unspeakable being from the Far Realm or an elder god---a being such as Tharizdun, the Chained God; Zargon, the Returner; Hadar, the Dark Hunger; or Great Cthulhu. Or you might in- voke several entities without yoking yourself to one. The motives of these beings are incomprehensible, and the Great Old One might be indifferent to your existence. But the secrets you've learned neverthe- less allow you to draw strange magic from it. LEVEL 3: AWAKENED MIND You can form a telepathic connection between your mind and the mind of another. As a Bonus Action, choose one creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. You and the chosen creature can com- municate telepathically with each other while the two of you are within a number of tiziles of each other equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 mile). To understand each ot v4 each must mentally use a language the othe: The telepathic connection lasts for a number of minutes equal to your Warlock level. It ends early if you use this feature to connect with a different creature. LEVEL 3: GREAT OLD ONE SPELLS The magic of your patron ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Warlock level specified in the Great Old One Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. GREAT OLD ONE SPELLS Warlock Level Spells 3 Detect Thoughts, Dissonant Whis- pers, Phantasmal Force, Tasha's Hideous Laughter 5 Clairvoyance, Hunger of Hadar Confusion, Summon Aberration Modify Memory, Telekinesis LEVEL 3: PsycHIc SPELLS When you cast a Warlock spell that deals damage, you can change its damage type to Psychic. In addition, when you cast a Warlock spell that is an Enchantment or Illusion, you can do so without Verbal or Somatic components. LEVEL 6: CLAIRVOYANT COMBATANT When you form a telepathic bond with a creature using your Awakened Mind, you can force that creature to make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the creature has Disadvantage on attack rolls against you, and you have Advantage on attack rolls against that creature for the duration of the bond. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Short or Long Rest unless you ex- pend a Pact Magic spell slot (no action required) to restore your use of it. LeEvEL 10: ELpRITCH HEX Your alien patron grants you a powerful curse. You always have the Hex spell prepared. When you cast Hex and choose an ability, the target also has Disad- vantage on saving throws of the chosen ability for the duration of the spell. LEVEL 10: THOUGHT SHIELD Your thoughts can't be read by telepathy or other means unless you allow it. You also have Resistance to Psychic damage, and whenever a creature deals Psychic damage to you, that creature takes the same amount of damage that you take. LeveL 14: CREATE THRALL When you cast Summon Aberration, you can modify it so that it doesn't require Concentration. If you do so, the spell's duration becomes 1 minute for that casting, and when summoned, the Aberration has a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your War- lock level plus your Charisma modifier. In addition, the first time each turn the Aberra- tion hits a creature under the effect of your Hex, the Aberration deals extra Psychic damage to the target equal to the bonus damage of that spell. Great O.o One PatRON Susciass 163 User of Arcane = 3s = = Ss ES A \< Ff ee Primary Ability Intelligence Hit Point Die Saving Throw Proficiencies D6 per Wizard level Intelligence and Wisdom Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: Arcana, History, Insight, Investigation, Medi- cine, Nature, or Religion wy | Core WiZARD TRAITS | | Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons None Choose A or B: (A) 2 Daggers, Arcane Focus (Quarterstaff), Robe, Spellbook, Scholar's Pack, and 5 GP; or (B) 55 GP ane IZARDS ARE DEFINED BY THEIR W exhaustive study of magic's inner work- / / ings. They cast spells of explosive fire, arcing lightning, subtle deception, and spectacular transformations. Their magic conjures monsters from other planes of existence, glimpses the future, or forms protective barriers. Their mightiest spells change one substance into another, call meteors from the sky, or open portals to other worlds. Most Wizards share a scholarly approach to magic. They examine the theoretical underpinnings of magic, particularly the categorization of spells into schools of magic. Renowned Wizards such as Bigby, Tasha, Mordenkainen, and Yolande have built on their studies to invent iconic spells now used across the multiverse. The closest a Wizard is likely to come to an or- dinary life is working as a sage or lecturer. Other Wizards sell their services as advisers, serve in mili- tary forces, or pursue lives of crime or domination. But the lure of knowledge calls even the most unadventurous Wizards from the safety of their libraries and laboratories and into crumbling ruins and lost cities. Most Wizards believe that their counterparts in ancient civilizations knew secrets of magic that have been lost to the ages, and discov- ering those secrets could unlock the path to a power greater than any magic available in the present age. Armor Training Starting Equipment SS # Becoming A Wizard... As A LEVEL \| CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Wizard Traits table. - Gain the Wizard's level 1 features, which are listed in the Wizard Features table. 2. ad As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER \| - Gain the Hit Point Die from the Core Wizard \| Traits table. \|: Gain the Wizard's level 1 features, which are listed in the Wizard Features table. See the multiclass- ing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. WIzarD CLASS FEATURES As a Wizard, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Wizard levels. These features are listed in the Wizard Features table. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING As a student of Arcane magic, you have learned to cast spells. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcast- ing. The information below details how you use those rules with Wizard spells, which appear in the Wizard spell list later in the class's description. Cantrips. You know three Wizard cantrips of your choice. Light, Mage Hand, and Ray of Frost are recom- mended. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one of your cantrips from this feature with another Wizard cantrip of your choice. When you reach Wizard levels 4 and 10, you learn another Wizard cantrip of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Wizard Features table. Spellbook. Your wizardly apprenticeship cul- minated in the creation of a unique book: your spellbook. It is a Tiny object that weighs 3 pounds, contains 100 pages, and can be read only by you or someone casting Identify. You determine the book's appearance and materials, such as a gilt-edged tome ora collection of vellum bound with twine. The book contains the level 1+ spells you know. It starts with six level 1 Wizard spells of your choice. Detect Magic, Feather Fall, Mage Armor, Magic Missile, Sleep, and Thunderwave are recommended. Whenever you gain a Wizard level after 1, add two Wizard spells of your choice to your spellbook. Each of these spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots, as shown in the Wizard Features table. The spells are the culmination of Arcane re- search you do regularly. Spell Slots. The Wizard Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To do so, choose four spells from your spellbook. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES # 165 Wizard Features Proficiency Level Bonus \_\_ Class Features 1 +2 Spellcasting, Ritual Adept, Arcane Recovery 2 +2 Scholar 3 +2 Wizard Subclass 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement 4 43 Memorize Spell 6 +3 Subclass feature 7 +3 = 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 9 +4 \_ 10 +4 Subclass feature i +4 --- 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 13 +5 = 14 +5 Subclass feature 15 +5 --- 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 7 +6 --- 18 +6 Spell Mastery 19 +6 Epic Boon 20 +6 Signature Spells The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Wizard levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Wizard Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional Wiz- ard spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 3 Wizard, your list of pre- pared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination, chosen from your spellbook. If another Wizard feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Wizard spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of pre- pared spells, replacing any of the spells there with spells from your spellbook. Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcast- ing ability for your Wizard spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus or your spellbook as a Spellcasting Focus for your Wizard spells. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES ho OL Cantrips 3 UUnnununununuuu bh Be eee EWW Prepared Spell Slots per Spell Level Spells 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 w a Shp eR eRe RR RR RR RRR eA WwW WwW ww wWwWwWwwWwwww WwW WWW wwnwnwwnw ww WWW wWwwwnwwww iw BWWNNNNNNNDND = RR SP en ee i ee ee ee ee ee) LEVEL 1: RITUAL ADEPT You can cast any spell as a Ritual if that spell has the Ritual tag and the spell is in your spellbook. You needn't have the spell prepared, but you must read from the book to cast a spell in this way. LEVEL 1: ARCANE RECOVERY You can regain some of your magical energy by studying your spellbook. When you finish a Short Rest, you can choose expended spell slots to recover. The spell slots can have a combined level equal to no more than half your Wizard level (round up), and none of the slots can be level 6 or higher. For exam- ple, if you're a level 4 Wizard, you can recover up to two levels' worth of spell slots, regaining either one level 2 spell slot or two level 1 spell slots. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 2: SCHOLAR While studying magic, you also specialized in an- other field of study. Choose one of the following skills in which you have proficiency: Arcana, His- tory, Investigation, Medicine, Nature, or Religion. You have Expertise in the chosen skill. a EXPANDING AND REPLACING A SPELLBOOK The spells you add to your spellbook as you gain levels reflect your ongoing magical research, but you might find other spells during your adven- tures that you can add to the book. You could dis- cover a Wizard spell on a Spell Scroll, for example, and then copy it into your spellbook. Copying a Spell into the Book. When you find a level 1+ Wizard spell, you can copy it into your spellbook if it's of a level you can prepare and if you have time to copy it. For each level of the spell, the transcription takes 2 hours and costs 50 GP. Afterward you can prepare the spell like the other spells in your spellbook. Copying the Book. You can copy a spell from your spellbook into another book. This is like copying a new spell into your spellbook but faster, since you already know how to cast the spell. You need spend only 1 hour and 10 GP for each level of the copied spell. If you lose your spellbook, you can use the same procedure to transcribe the Wizard spells that you have prepared into a new spellbook. Filling out the remainder of the new book requires you to find new spells to do so. For this reason, many wizards keep a backup spellbook. = LEVEL 3: WIZARD SUBCLASS You gain a Wizard subclass of your choice. The Ab- jurer, Diviner, Evoker, and Illusionist subclasses are detailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Wizard levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Wizard level or lower. LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Wizard levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: MEMORIZE SPELL Whenever you finish a Short Rest, you can study your spellbook and replace one of the level 1+ Wiz- ard spells you have prepared for your Spellcasting feature with another level 1+ spell from the book. LEVEL 18: SPELL MASTERY You have achieved such mastery over certain spells that you can cast them at will. Choose a level 1 and a level 2 spell in your spellbook that have a casting time of an action. You always have those spells prepared, and yeu can cast them at their lowest level without expending a spell slot. To cast either spell at a higher levei, you must expend a spell slot. Twe ELF QUEEN YOLANDE AWES A REO ORAGON WITH HER SPELL, YOLANODE'S Recar Presence Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can study your spellbook and replace one of those spells with an eligible spell of the same level from the book. LEVEL 19: Epic Boon You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Spell Recall is recommended. LEVEL 20: SIGNATURE SPELLS Choose two level 3 spells in your spellbook as your signature spells. You always have these spells pre- pared, and you can cast each of them once at level 3 without expending a spell slot. When you do so, you can't cast them in this way again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. To cast either spell at a higher level, you must expend a spell slot. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES A 167 Pr "\| \~ "68 # Wizard Spell List This section presents the Wizard spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alpha- betized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Special column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. CANTRIPS (LEVEL O WIZARD SPELLS) Spell Acid Splash Blade Ward Chill Touch Dancing Lights Elementalism Fire Bolt Friends Light Mage Hand Mending Message Mind Sliver Minor Illusion Poison Spray Prestidigitation Ray of Frost Shocking Grasp Thunderclap Toll the Dead True Strike LeveL 1 WizarD SPELLS Spell Alarm Burning Hands Charm Person Chromatic Orb Color Spray Comprehend Languages Detect Magic Disguise Self Expeditious Retreat False Life Feather Fall Find Familiar Fog Cloud Grease School Special Evocation =*--- Abjuration Cc Necromancy =* Mlusion (es Transmutation --- Evocation --- Enchantment le Evocation *Conjuration* Transmutation --- Transmutation = --- Enchantment *--- Illusion --- Necromancy* Transmutation --- Evocation a Evocation --- Evocation --- Necromancy Divination \_ School Special Abjuration R Evocation \_--- Enchantment --- Evocation M Illusion --- Divination R Divination C,R Illusion --- Transmutation (e Necromancy - Transmutation --- Conjuration R,M Conjuration Cc Conjuration \_--- # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Spell Ice Knife Identify Illusory Script Jump Longstrider Mage Armor Magic Missile Protection from Evil and Good Ray of Sickness Shield Silent Image Sleep Tasha's Hideous Laughter Tenser's Floating Disk Thunderwave Unseen Servant Witch Bolt LeveL 2 WIZARD SPELLS Spell Alter Self Arcane Lock Arcane Vigor Augury Blindness/Deafness Blur Cloud of Daggers Continual Flame Crown of Madness Darkness Darkvision Detect Thoughts Dragon's Breath Enhance Ability Enlarge/Reduce Flaming Sphere Gentle Repose Gust of Wind Hold Person Invisibility Knock Levitate Locate Object Magic Mouth School Special Conjuration --- Divination R,M Illusion RM Transmutation --- Transmutation = Abjuration = Evocation = Abjuration c,M Necromancy = Abjuration a Illusion Cc Enchantment c Enchantment Gc Conjuration R Evocation = Conjuration R Evocation € School Transmutation Cc Abjuration M Abjuration = Divination R,M Transmutation \_--- Special Illusion Conjuration Evocation Enchantment AON EaN0 Evocation Transmutation Divination Transmutation Transmutation Transmutation # Aa Ao Sal Evocation = Necromancy R Evocation Enchantrnent A OY Or Ilusion Transrautation ao Transmutation Divination Illusion R,M Spell School Special Spell School Magic Weapon Transmutation --- Magic Circle Abjuration M Melf's Acid Arrow Evocation \_ Major Image Ilusion Cc Mind Spike Divination ¢ Nondetection Abjuration M Mirror Image Mlusion = Phantom Steed Illusion R Misty Step Conjuration \_ Protection from Energy Abjuration c Nystul's Magic Aura Illusion *--- Remove Curse Abjuration --- Phantasmal Force Illusion Cc Sending Divination = Ray of Enfeeblement Necromancy G Sleet Storm Conjuration Cc Rope Trick Transmutation = --- Slow Transmutation (ec Scorching Ray Evocation* Speak with Dead Necromancy = See Invisibility Divination --- Stinking Cloud Conjuration G Shatter Evocation = Summon Fey Conjuration c,M Spider Climb Transmutation Cc Summon Undead Necromancy c,M Suggestion Enchantment Cc Tongues Divination = Web Conjuration c Vampiric Touch Necromancy c Water Breathing Transmutation R LeveL 3 WIZARD SPELLS Spell School Special LeveL 4 WIZARD SPELLS Animate Dead Necromancy \_ Spell School Special Bestow Curse Necromancy Cc Arcane Eye Divination Cc Blink Transmutation --- Banishment Abjuration (i Clairvoyance Divination c,M Blight Necromancy = Counterspell Abjuration ---\_ Charm Monster Enchantment *--- Dispel Magic Abjuration* --- Confusion Enchantment c Fear Illusion Cc Conjure Minor Elementals = Conjuration iG Feign Death Necromancy R Control Water Transmutation Cc Fireball Evocation *--- Dimension Door Conjuration* Fly Transmutation (\<2 Divination Divination R,M Gaseous Form Transmutation (es Evard's Black Tentacles Conjuration (c Glyph of Warding Abjuration M Fabricate Transmutation --- Haste Transmutation c Fire Shield Evocation \_ Hypnotic Pattern Illusion Cc Greater Invisibility Illusion Cc ov Leomund's Tiny Hut Evocation R Hallucinatory Terrain Illusion Lightning Bolt Evocation \_ Spell School Special Spell; School; Special 1 Ice Storm Evocation = Telekinesis 'Teghenutedlen a Leomund's Secret Chest Conjuration M Teleportation Circle Conjuration M Locate Creature Divination Cc Wall of Force Evocation € Mordenkainen's Faithful Conjuration --- Wall of Stone Evocation c Hound Yolande's Regal Presence Enchantment (cs co Si fecal \~ LeveL 6 WIZARD SPELLS Otiluke's Resilient Sphere Abjuration Cc Spell School Special Phantasmal Killer Illusion Cc Arcane Gate Conjuration Cc Polymorph Transmutation (a Chain Lightning Evocation =i Stone Shape Transmutation ---\_ Circle of Death Necromancy M Stoneskin Transmutation C,M Contingency Abjuration M Summon Aberration Conjuration cM Create Undead Necromancy M Summon Construct Conjuration c,M Disintegrate Transmutation --- Summon Elemental Conjuration Cc,M Drawmij's Instant Summons Conjuration R,M Vitriolic Sphere Evocation = Eyebite Necromancy Cc Wall of Fire Evocation le Flesh to Stone Transmutation Cc Globe of Invulnerability Abjuration Ee LeveL 5 WIZARD SPELLS Guards and Wards Abjuration M Spell School Special Magic Jar Necromancy M Animate Objects Transmutation Cc Mass Suggestion Erichantrient a Bigby's Hand Evocation Cc Move Earth Transmutation Cc Circle of Power Abjuration c Otiluke's Freezing Sphere Evocation *--- Clondkill Conjuration G Otto's Irresistible Dance Enchantment Ec Cones Cold Evocation as Programmed Illusion Illusion M Conjure Elemental Conjuration iG Slimmon Fiend Conjuration CM Contact Other Plane Divination R Subear Eveeation c cegion {luston --- Tasha's Bubbling Cauldron --- Conjuration M Dominate Person Enchantment (a True Seeing Divination M aw MRasien sig Wall of Ice Evocation Cc \~ Geas Enchantment --- =, Hold Monster Enchantment C LeveL 7 WIZARD SPELLS Jallarzi's Storm of Radiance Evocation c Spell School Special Legend Lore Divination M Delayed Blast Fireball Evocation c Mislead Illusion E Etherealness Conjuration* --- Modify Memory Enchantment c Finger of Death Necromancy --- Passwall Transmutation Forcecage Evocation c,M Planar Binding Abjuration M Mirage Arcane Illusion \_ Rary's Telepathic Bond Divination R Mordenkainen's Magnificent Conjuration M Scrying Divination C,M Mansion Seeming iiusion = Mordenkainen's Sword Evocation C,M Steel Wind Strike Conjuration M Plane Shift Conjuration M Summon Dragon Conjuration C,M Prismatic Spray Evo. = Synaptic Static Enchantment --- Project Image Musion c,M CHAPTER\| CHARACTER CLASSES LEE Spell Reverse Gravity Sequester Simulacrum Symbol Teleport LeveL 8 WIZARD SPELLS Spell Antimagic Field Antipathy/Sympathy Befuddlement Clone Control Weather Demiplane Dominate Monster Incendiary Cloud Maze Mind Blank School Transmutation Transmutation Illusion Abjuration Conjuration School Abjuration Enchantment Enchantment Necromancy Transmutation Conjuration Enchantment Conjuration Conjuration Abjuration Special Cc M M M Special (ce | ta = aaa Spell School Special Power Word Stun Enchantment --- ah Sunburst Evocation --- \| Telepathy Divination \_ LeveL 9 WIZARD SPELLS Spell School Special Astral Projection Necromancy M Foresight Divination \_- Gate Conjuration c,M Imprisonment Abjuration M Meteor Swarm Evocation = Power Word Kill Enchantment \_ Prismatic Wall Abjuration = Shapechange Transmutation C,M Time Stop Transmutation --- True Polymorph Transmutation C Weird Illusion iG Wish Conjuration =