# Word Of Radiance Evocation Cantrip (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, M (a sunburst token) Duration: Instantaneous Burning radiance erupts from you in a 5-foot Em- anation. Each creature of your choice that you can see in it must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 1d6 Radiant damage. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d6 when you reach levels 5 (2d6), 11 (3d6), and 17 (4d6). WoRD OF RECALL Level 6 Conjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 5 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You and up to five willing creatures within 5 feet of you instantly teleport to a previously designated sanctuary. You and any creatures that teleport with you appear in the nearest unoccupied space to the spot you designated when you prepared your sanc- tuary (see below). If you cast this spell without first preparing a sanctuary, the spell has no effect. You must designate a location, such as a temple, as a sancliiary by casting this spell there. WRATHFUL SMITE Level 1 Necromancy (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a creature with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: 1 minute The target takes an extra 1d6 Necrotic damage from the attack, and it must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition until the spell ends. At the end of each of its turns, the Frightened target repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. YOLANDE'S REGAL PRESENCE Level 5 Enchantment (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Component: V, S, M (a miniature tiara) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You surround yourself with unearthly majesty in a 10-foot Emanation. Whenever the Emanation en- ters the space of a creature you can see and when- ever a creature you can see enters the Emanation or ends its turn there, you can force that creature to make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes 4d6 Psychic damage and has the Prone condition, and you can push it up to 10 feet away. On a successful save, the target takes half as much damage only. A creature makes this save only once per turn. # Zone Of Truth Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: 10 minutes You create a magical zone that guards against de- ception in a 15-foot-radius Sphere centered ona point within range. Until the spell ends, a creature that enters the spell's area for the first time on a turn or starts its turn there makes a Charisma sav- ing throw. Ona failed save, a creature can't speak a deliberate lie while in the radius. You know whether a creature succeeds or fails on this save. An affected creature is aware of the spell and can avoid answering questions to which it would normally respond with a lie, Such a creature can be evasive yet must be truthful. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS q # 343 Appendix A # The Multiverse This appendix provides an overview of the mul- tiverse, the overarching reality that encompasses D&D's countless worlds and adventures. These realms are explored in greater detail in the Dungeon Master's Guide, along with other planes like the Far Realm, Negative Plane, and Positive Plane. # The Material Realms The philosophical and elemental forces of reality converge to create the following planes of existence: Material Plane. Most D&D adventures take place on the Material Plane, which holds the worlds of settings like Dragonlance, Eberron, the Forgotten Realms, and Greyhawk. There's also room for any world your group creates. Magic and physical laws shape this plane's diverse worlds. Feywild. This vibrant, idealized realm brims with life and emotion, which are most intense in the realm's Domains of Delight. Shadowfell. This gloom-haunted realm holds grim wastelands, haunted ruins, and the infamous Do- mains of Dread. # Transitive Planes The transitive planes serve as paths between planes: Astral Plane. This endless, silvery expanse links the Material Plane and the Outer Planes. Whole civi- lizations have arisen in this glimmering vastness, while others navigate the magical cosmos in spell- jamming vessels. Ethereal Plane. This ghostly realm connects the Material Plane and the Inner Planes. The region where the Ethereal Plane overlaps with other planes is called the Border Ethereal, a place where creatures can glimpse visions of planes beyond. # The Inner Planes Elemental forces and the building blocks of reality originate from these Inner Planes: Elemental Plane of Air. Winds blow clouds and floating islands across this boundless sky. Elemental Plane of Earth. This maze of caverns winds through stone and untold mineral riches. Elemental Plane of Fire. An everlasting inferno, this realm blazes with life on volcanic islands. Elemental Plane of Water. This bottomless ocean churns with mysterious sea life.. 244, APPENDIX A \| THE MULTIVERSE Elemental Chaos. Here on the fringes of the Inner Planes, elemental forces clash unpredictably. Para-Elemental Planes. In these borderlands be- tween the Elemental Planes, elemental forces combine into realms of ash, ice, magma, and ooze, # The Outer Planes Realms where ideas take form and spirits spend their afterlives, the Outer Planes are the homes of immortals. The following locations compose the Outer Planes: Sigil. Sigil, the City of Doors, is a metropolis rather than a plane at the center of the Outer Planes. Here portals lead throughout the multiverse, and the enigmatic Lady of Pain maintains order. Outlands. Influences from the other Outer Planes converge in the Outlands, where portals lead to those planes. At the Outlands' center rises the Spire, a pillar atop which floats Sigil. Other Outer Planes. These planes are listed on the Outer Planes table. Some are paradises, some are nightmare realms, and some are more bizarre. Each is dominated by forces that embody one or more of the alignments described in chapter 2. OuTER PLANES Outer Plane Alignment Abyss Chaotic Evil Acheron Lawful Evil, Lawful Neutral Arborea Chaotic Good Arcadia Lawful Good, Lawful Neutral Beastlands Chaotic Good, Neutral Good Bytopia Lawful Good, Neutral Good Carceri Chaotic Evil, Neutral Evil Elysium Neutral Good Gehenna Lawful Evil, Neutral Evil Hades Neutral Evil Limbo Chaotic Neutral Mechanus Lawful Neutral Mount Celestia Lawful Good Nine Hells Lawful Evil Outlands Neutral Pandemonium Chaotic Evil, Chaotic Neutral Ysgard Chaotic Good, Chaotic Neutral Coun Gowaaers MOUNT CELESTI AL ARCADIA ee NINE HELLS aI GEHENNA - PLANEOF EARTH) het, a ni > \< a \> \* # Astral Plane sua BEASTLANDS ARBOREA YSGARD QUTLANDS # 7 Pandemonium Abyss CaRCERI HADES # Quter Planes # Appendix B Creature Stat Blocks This appendix provides stat blocks for creatures ) mentioned elsewhere in the book, particularly in f the class, equipment, and spell chapters. See the rules glossary for how to read a stat block, and see the Monster Manual for even more creatures. The following stat blocks are presented in alpha- aI betical order. When the Dungeon Master uses a stat 2 block, the DM may change details in it. | APE i rf Medium Beast, Unaligned \| \_ AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) \| HP 19 (3d8 + 6). \| Speed 30 ft., Climb 30 ft. BAT \| \| MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Tiny Beast, Unaligned \| Str 16 +3 43 Dex 14 +2 +2 CON14 +2 +2 \| ac 12 Initiative +2 (12) \| Int 6 -2 -2 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHAZ -2 -2 HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 5 ft., Fly 30 ft. | Senses Passive P ition 13 peeve a aaa Stk 2 -4 -4 Dex15 42 42 Con8 1 ---\] | Languages None Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHa 4 -3 -3 j \| Skills Athletics +5, Perception +3 MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE | | CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) \| | AcTIONS Senses Blindsight 60 ft., Passive Perception 11 A: L N Multiattack. The ape makes two Fist attacks. CRO (XP 10; PB 42) Fist. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) | Bludgeoning damage. ACTIONS Rock (Recharge 6). Ranged Attack Roll: +5, range Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing 25/50 ft. Hit: 10 (2d6 + 3) Bludgeoning damage. \[camage a BADGER BLACK BEAR \| Tiny Beast, Unaligned Medium Beast, Unaligned \| ACT Initiative +0 (10) ACT\] Initiative +1 (11) \| HP 5 (1d4 +3) HP 19 (3d8 + 6) Speed 20 ft., Burrow 5 ft \| \| Speed 30 ft., Climb 30 ft., Swim 30 ft.:; NOD SAV MOD SAVE MOD SAVE moo save \| at et woe \| \| Str 15 42 42 Dexl2 41 41 Conl4 42 42 Str 10 +0 +0 Dex\] +0 +0 Conlé +3 +3! ine Wisti2 ie) Cua's Spne3) \| \| INT 2 sAeee Wis 12 41 41 CHa 7 E22 5, i 4 Skills Perception +5 Skills Perception +3 xis a al panera 60 ft., Passive Perception 15 Senses Darkvision 30 ft., Passive Perception 13 ' anguages'None CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) CR 0 (XP 10; PB +2) ACTIONS Multiattack. The bear makes two fend attacks. | ACTIONS | Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +2, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing Rend. Melee Attack Roll: +4, react 511. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) damage. Slashing damage. ee wee AN \_ APPENDIX B \| CREATURE STAT BLOCKS | Medium Beast, Unaligned | | ACT\] Initiative +0 (10) i} | HP 13 (2d8 + 4) i ee 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| Str 13 +1 +1 Dex\] +0 +0 Conl4 +2 42 \| lint 2 -4 -4 Wis 9 -1 -1 CHaS 3 -3/\| | Senses Passive Perception 9 } | | CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) 1 | TRAITS | Bloodied Fury. While Bloodied, the boar has Advantage on attack rolls. ACTIONS Gore. Melee Attack Roll: +3, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) Piercing damage. If the boar moved at least 20 feet \| straight toward the target immediately before the hit, \| the target takes an extra 3 (1d6) Piercing damage and, \| if it is Large or smaller, has the Prone condition. ' Brown BEAR { Languages None \| \| | | | CAMEL } Large Beast, Unaligned AC 10 Initiative -1 (9) t HP 17 (2d10 + 6) i Speed 50 ft. i MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| Str 15 +2 +2 Dex 8 -1 -1 Conl7 43 45 \| Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHAS 3 3 \| Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages None CR 1/8 (XP 25; PB +2) i ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) \| Bludgeoning damage. i p Large Beast, Unaligned ( Cat } | Aci Initiative +1 (11):: | HP 22 (3410 + 6) Tiny Beast, Unaligned i | Speed 40 ft., Climb 30 ft. AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) j MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE HP 2 (1d4) q Str 17 +3 +3 Dex12 +1 +1 ConlS +2 +2 Speed 40 ft., Climb 40 ft. \| Int 2 24024 'wis 13 GI Chale MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \|} | | Skills Perception +3 y Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 \| Languages None ' CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) ACTIONS Multiattack. The bear makes one Bite attack and one Claw attack. Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) Piercing damage. Claw. Méciee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) Slashins damage, and the target has the Prone condi- tion if ii is Huge or smaller. Int 3-4-4 Wis 2 41 1 CA? 2 2 \| Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 Languages None CRO (XP 10; PB +2) TRAITS Jumper. The cat's jump distance is determined using its Dexterity rather than its Strength. ACTIONS Scratch. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Slash- ing damage. Crocoone # Constrictor Snake | Large Beast, Unaligned # Ac 13 HP 13 (2d10 + 2) | Speed 30 ft., Swim 30 ft. # Mod Save Mod Save Str 15 +2 42 Dex 14 +2 +2 Coni2 +1 +1 ---5 -5 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa3 -4 -4 Initiative +2 (12) # Mod Save Int 1 Skills Perception +2, Stealth +4 Senses Blindsight 10 ft., Passive Perception 12 Languages None CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) Piercing damage. Constrict. Strength Saving Throw: DC 12, one Medium or smaller creature the snake can see within 5 feet. Fail- | CROCODILE =-.) Large Beast, Unaligned AC 12 Initiative +0 (10) | HP 13 (2d10 + 2) | Speed 20 ft., Swim 30 ft. # Mod Save Mod Save Mod Save | Str 15 +2 +2 Dex 10 +0 +0 Conl3 +1 43 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHA5 -3 -3 Skills Stealth +2 Senses Passive Perception 10 | Languages None CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) TRAITS Hold Breath. The crocodile can hold its breath for 1 hour. ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d8 + 2) Piercing damage. If the target is Medium or smaller,\ it has the Grappled condition (escape DC 12). While Grappled, the target has the Restrained condition. j ure: 7 (3d4) Bludgeoning damage, and the target has Dire WoLF the Grappled condition (escape DC 12). Large Beast, Unaligned \| pe AC 14 Initiative +2 (12) HP 22 (3d10 + 6) Cras: Speed 50 ft. Tiny Beast, Unaligned MOD SAVE MOD SAVE moo save \| ACI Initiative +0 (10) Str 17 +3 +3 Dex 15 +2 +2 Conl5 +2 42 HP 3 (1d4 + 1) Int 3 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHA7 -2 =2 Speed 20 ft., Swim 20 ft.;; aa inet ieee Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 15 Stk 6 -2 -2. Dex\] A010 Coni2 41 41 Skills Stealth +2: Senses Blindsight 30 ft., Passive Perception 9 o Languages None \| CRO (XP 10; PB +2) TRAITS Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water. he ACTIONS | Claw. Melee Attack Roll: +2, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Bids: ce nell nd ing damage. Languages None CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) TRAITS Pack Tactics. The wolf has Advantage on an attack roll against a creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the creature and the ally doesn't have the Incapacitated condition. ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 8 (1d10 + 3) Piercing damage, and the target has the Prone condi- tion if it is Huge or smaller. Fros # --- Draft Horse Large Beast, Unaligned AC 10 HP 15 (2d10 + 4) \| Speed 40 ft. MOD SAVE Str 18 +4 +4 Initiative +0 (10) # Mod Save Mod Save Dex 10 +0 +0 Conil5 42 42 | Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHa7 -2 -2 | \| j Senses Passive Perception 10 \| \| Languages None! \| CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) \| ACTIONS Hooves. Melee Attack Roll: +6, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d4 +4) Bludgeoning damage. \| ELEPHANT \] Huge Beast, Unaligned \| AC 12 Initiative -1 (9) HP 76 (8d12 + 24) \| Speed 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE # Mod Save | Str 22 +6 +6 Dex 9 -1 -1 COoNn17 +3 +3 | int 30lz4=4 Wis 11 400G0N (CHAle 2mm Senses Passive Perception 10 \| Languages None CR 4 (XP 1,100; PB +2) | ACTIONS Multiattack. The elephant makes two Gore attacks. Gore. Melee Attack Roll: +8, reach 5 ft. Hit: 15 (2d8 + 6) Piercing damage. If the elephant moved at least 20 feet straight toward the target immediately before the hit, the target also has the Prone condition. Bonus AcTIONS Trample. Dexterity Saving Throw: DC 16, one creature within 5 feet that has the Prone condition. Failure: 17; (2d10 + 6) Bludgeoning damage. Success: Half damage. ee f ELK \| Large Beast, Unaligned AC 10 Initiative +0 (10) HP 11 (2d10) Speed 50 ft, \| MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 16 +3 +3 Dex10 +0 +0 Conll +0 +0 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa6é -2 2 Skills Perception +2 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 } Languages None | CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) ACTIONS Ram. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) \| Bludgeoning damage. If the elk moved at least 20 feet straight toward the target immediately before the hit, the target takes an extra 3 (1d6) Bludgeoning damage and, if it is Huge or smaller, has the Prone condition. ooo ¢ \| FROG Tiny Beast, Unaligned Aci Initiative +1 (11) HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 20 ft., Swim 20 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Stk 1 -5 -5 Dex13 +1 +1 Con8 -1 ---1 Int 1 -5 -5 Wis 8 -1 -1 CHa3 -4 -4 Skills Perception +1, Stealth +3 Senses Darkvision 30 ft., Passive Perception 11 Languages None CRO (XP 10; PB +2) TRAITS Amphibious, The frog can breathe air and water. Standing Leap. The frog's Long Jump is up to 10 feet and its High Jump is up to 5 feet with or without a run- ning start. ' AcTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +3, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing damage, { APPENDIX B \| CREATURE STAT BLOCKS al GIANT BADGER | Medium Beast, Unaligned | AC 13 | HP 15 (2d8 + 6) | Speed 30 ft., Burrow 10 ft. Initiative +0 (10) 1 MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| Str 13 41 +1 Dex 10 +0 +0 Conl7 +3 +3 \| Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHaS -3 -3 | Skills Perception +3 | Resistances Poison | Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 | Languages None CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) | | Actions | Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +3, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (2d4 + 1) | Piercing damage. CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) a # Giant Goat Large Beast, Unaligned. AC 11 Initiative +1 (11) HP 19 (3d10 + 3) Speed 40 ft., Climb 30 ft. ap MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD Save Str 17 +3 +5 Dex 13 +1 +1 Conl2 +1 41 Int 3 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHA 6 -2 -2 Skills Perception +3 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 Languages None ACTIONS Ram. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) Bludgeoning damage. If the goat moved at least 20 feet \| straight toward the target immediately before the hit, \| the target takes an extra 5 (2d4) Bludgeoning damage and, if it is Huge or smaller, has the Prone condition. | \| GIANT CRAB | Medium Beast, Unaligned | acis Initiative +1 (11) | HP 13 (3d8) | Speed 30 ft., Swim 30 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| Str 13 41 41 Dex13 +1 #1 Conll +0 +0 \[intr 1-5 -5 Wis 9 -1 -1 Cua3 -4 -4 Skills Stealth +3 Senses Blindsight 30 ft., Passive Perception 9 Languages None CR 1/8 (25 XP; PB +2) TRAITS Amphibious. The crab can breathe air and water. ACTIONS Claw. Melee Attack Roll: +3, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (16 + 1) Bludgeoning damage. If the target is Medium or smaller, it has the Grappled condition (escape DC 11). The crab has two claws, each of which can grapple one target. GIANT SEAHORSE Large Beast, Unaligned AC 14 Initiative +1 (11) HP 16 (3d10) \| Speed 5 ft., Swim 40 ft. } MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| Str 15 +2 +2 Dex12 +1 +1 Conti 40 40 \| Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHaS -3 -3 \| ii Senses Passive Perception 11 \| Languages None CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) \| TRAITS Water Breathing. The seahorse can breathe only underwater. ACTIONS Ram, Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 9 (2d6 + 2) Bludgeoning damage, or the seahorse deals 11 (2d8 + 2) Bludgeoning damage if it moved at least 20 feet straight toward the target immediately before the hit. Bonus ACTIONS Bubble Dash, While underwater, tiie seahorse moves up to half its Swim Speed witheut provoking Opportu- nity Attacks, Amant Hci le; \| GIANT SPIDER | Large Beast, Unaligned | | AC 14 HP 26 (4d10 + 4) Speed 30 ft., Climb 30 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 14 +2 +2 Dex16 +3 +3 Conl2 +1 +1 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHa4 -3 -3 Initiative +3 (13) | | i l | Skills Perception +4, Stealth +7 | Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 14 | Languages None | CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) TRAITS Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including along ceilings, without needing to make an ability check. Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused by webs, and it knows the location of any other creature in contact with the same web. Actions Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) Piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) Poison damage. Web (Recharge 5-6). Dexterity Saving Throw: DC 13, 3 one creature the spider can see within 60 feet. Failure: 5 The 'arget has the Restrained condition until the web is destroyed (AC 10; HP 5; Vulnerability to Fire damage; Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage). Piercing damage. GIANT WEASEL Medium Beast, Unaligned AC 13 HP 9 (248) Speed 40 ft., Climb 30 ft. Initiative +3 (13) # Mod Save MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 11 +0 +0 Dex 17 +3 +3 Conl0 +0 +40 Int 4-3-3 Wis 12 +1 +1, CHAS -3 -3 Skills Acrobatics +5, Perception +3, Stealth +5 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 Languages None CR 1/8 (XP 25; PB +2) ACTIONS |:! Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) | \| Actions Str 11 +0 42 Dex10 +0 +0 Conll Int 2-4-4, Wis 10 40 40 Cha 5 Skills Perception +2 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 Languages None | CRO (xP 10; PB +2) 1 D..9, Goat Medium Beast, Unaligned AC 10 Initiative +0 (10) \| HP 4 (148) Speed 40 ft., Climb 30 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Ram. Melee Attack Roll: +2, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Bludgeon ing damage, or the goat deals 2 (1d4) Bludgeoning damage if it moved at least 20 feet straight toward the | target immediately before the hit. RIF Sapna Hawk Tiny Beast, Unaligned AC 13 Initiative +3 (13) HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 10 ft., Fly 60 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Stk 5 -3 -3 Dex16 +3 +3 Con8 # -1 -1 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 14 +2 +2. CHa6 -2 -2 Skills Perception +6 Senses Passive Perception 16 Languages None CR 0 (XP 10; PB +2) ACTIONS Talons. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Slash- ing damage. c= ¢ 'Ime Tiny Fiend (Devil), Lawful Evil \| AC 13 Initiative +3 (13) | HP 21 (6d4 + 6) Speed 20 ft., Fly 40 ft. i MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| StR 6 -2 -2 Dex17 +3 +3 Con?3 +1 +1 Int 11 +0 +0 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHA14 42 +2 | Skills Deception +4, Insight +3, Stealth +5 | Resistances Cold Immunities Fire, Poison; Poisoned Senses Darkvision 120 ft., Passive Perception 11 Languages Common, Infernal CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) TRAITS Devil's Sight. Magical Darkness doesn't impede the imp's Darkvision. Magic Resistance. The imp has Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. ACTIONS Sting. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d6 + 3) Piercing damage plus 7 (2d6) Poison damage. Invisibility. The imp casts Invisibility on itself, requiring no spell components and using Charisma as the spell- casting ability. | Shape-Shift. The imp shape-shifts to resemble a rat (Speed 20 ft.), a raven (20 ft., Fly 60 ft.), or a spider (20 ft., Climb 20 ft,), or it returns to its true form. Its | statistics are the same in each form, except for its Skills Perception +3, Stealth +4 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 Languages None CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) TRAITS LION Large Beast, Unaligned AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) HP 22 (4d10) Speed 50 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 17 +3 +3 Dex15 +2 +2 Conll +0 +0 Int 3 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHa8 -1 -\] Pack Tactics. The lion has Advantage on an attack roll against a creature if at least one of the lion's allies is within 5 feet of the creature and the ally doesn't have the Incapacitated condition. Running Leap. With a 10-foot running start, the lion can Long Jump up to 25 feet. ACTIONS Multiattack. The lion makes two Rend attacks. It can replace one of these attacks with a use of Roar. Rend. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) Slashing damage. Roar. Wisdom Saving Throw: DC 11, one creature within 15 feet. Failure: The target has the Frightened condition Speed. Any equipment it's wearing or carrying isn't transformed. - APPENDIX B! CREATURE STAT BLOCKS until the start of the lion's next turn. Sa EES 1 ee concertor MULE } I! \] 4 Medium Beast, Unaligned AC 10 HP 11 (2d8 + 2) Speed 40 ft. # Mod Save Initiative +0 (10) \ \| } MOD SAVE MOD SAVE j Str 14 +2 +4 Dex10 +0 +0 Coni3 41 41 \| Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 10 40 40 CHas 3 3 \| Senses Passive Perception 10 \| Languages None CR 1/8 (XP 25; PB +2} \| LIZARD }: ) \| Tiny Beast, Unaligned \| Traits \| AC 10 Initiative +0 (10) Beast of Burden. The mule counts as one size larger for \| \| HP 2 (1d4) the purpose of determining its carrying capacity. i \| speed 20 ft., Climb 20 ft. Reston sigp- give jus anre sscsiee \| \| str 2 -4 -4 Dex11 +0 +0 Conl0 +0 +40 Hooves. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d4\ f A ivr 1 2595 wiscs EET cua:a Bey BL 2 Puceeonine damage. Senses Darkvision 30 ft., Passive Perception 9 = Languages None Octopus CRO (XP 10; PB +2) Small Beast, Unaligned TRAITS AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) i Spider Climb. The lizard limb difficul fi HP:3 (195) 1 pli ys imb. wear cart ciim) 1 re it surfaces, Speed 5 ft., Swim 30 ft. including along ceilings, without needing to make an soit sere nooreaae roar ability check. Ste 4-3-3 Dex15 42 42 Conti 40 40 ACTIONS Int 3-4 -4 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa4 -3 -3 Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +2, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing Skills Perception +2, Stealth +6 ( damage. Senses Darkvision 30 ft., Passive Perception 12 \_--- Languages None CRO (XP 10; PB +2) MASTIFF - - TRAITS Medium Beast, Unaligned 5 a F Compression. The octopus can move through a space AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) as narrow as 1 inch without squeezing. HP 5 (1d8 + 1) Water Breathing. The octopus can breathe only Speed 40 ft. 8 P MOD. SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE underwater. Str 13 +1 +1 Dex 14 +2 +2 Conil2 +1 +1 ACTIONS Inn 3 =AUSGS (WISs12 SURES GHAY7 geo Tentacles. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Blud- Skills Perception +5 geoning damage. Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 15 RE. ON Languages None AGHIONS CR 1/8 {%P 25; PB +2) Ink Cloud (1/Day). Trigger: A creature ends its turn; within 5 feet of the octopus while underwater. Response: Actions The octopus releases ink that fills a 5-foot Cube cen- Bite. Meice Attack Roll: +3, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d6 + 1) tered on itself, and the octopus moves up to its Swim Piercing damage, and the target has the Prone condi- Speed. The Cube is Heavily Obscured for 1 minute or tion if it is Large or smaller. until a strong current or similar effect disperses the ink. lee APPENDIX B \| CREATURE STAT BLOCKS --------- --- Tiny Beast, Unaligned Initiative +1 (11) AC11 HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 5 ft., Fly 60 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 3 -4 -4 Dex13 +1 +1 Con8 -1 ----1 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHa7 -2 -2 | Skills Perception +5, Stealth +5 Senses Darkvision 120 ft., Passive Perception 15 Languages None CR 0 (XP 10; PB +2) = oe ae ---\> PONY Medium Beast, Unaligned AC 10 Initiative +0 (10) HP 11 (2d8 + 2) Speed 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 15 +2 +4 Dex10 +0 +0 Conl3 +1 41 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHA 7 -2 -2 Senses Passive Perception 10 Languages None CR 1/8 (XP 25; PB +2) ACTIONS Hooves. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d4 - 2) Bludgeoning damage. \[ ) Bludg: TRAITS Flyby. The owl doesn't provoke Opportunity Attacks when it flies out of an enemy's reach. ACTIONS Talons. Melee Attack Roll: +3, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Slash- ing damage. PANTHER Medium Beast, Unaligned AC 12 HP 13 (3d8) Speed 50 ft., Climb 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 14 +2 +2 Dex 15 +2 +2 Conl0 +0 +0 Int 3 -4 -4 Wis 14 42 42 CHa7 -2 -2 Initiative +2 (12) Skills Perception +4, Stealth +6 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 14 Languages None CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) ACTIONS Multiattack. The panther makes one Pounce attack and uses Prowl. Pounce. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d4 - 2) Slashing damage, or the panther deals 7 (2d4 + 2) Slashing damage if it had Advantage on the attack roll. Prowl. The panther moves up to half its Speed with- out provoking Opportunity Attacks. At the end of this PSEUDODRAGON Tiny Dragon, Neutral Good AC 14 Initiative +2 (12) HP 10 (3d4 + 3) Speed 15 ft., Fly 60 ft. # Mod Save Mod Save Str 6 -2 -2 Dex15 +2 +2 Int 10 +0 +0 Wis 12 +1 +1 # Mod Save Con 13 +1 +\] CHa 10 +0 +0 Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 Senses Blindsight 10 ft., Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 15 Languages Understands Common and Draconic but can't speak CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) TRAITS Magic Resistance. The pseudodragon has Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. ACTIONS Multiattack. The pseudodragon makes two Bite attacks. Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 4 (1d4 + 2) Piercing damage. Sting. Constitution Saving Throw: DC 12, one creature the pseudodragon can see within 5 feet. Failure: 5 (2d4 + 2) Poison damage, and the target has the Poisoned condition for 1 hour, Failure by 5 or More: The Poi- soned target also has the Unconscious condition until it takes damage or another creature takes an action to shake it awake. movement, the panther can take the Hide action. # Adam Venice Bora Pindads --- QuasiT \|, Tiny Fiend (Demon), Chaotic Evil AC 13 Initiative +3 (13) HP 25 (10d4) Speed 40 ft. # Mod Save Mod Save Mod Save Str 5 -3 -3 Dex 17 +3 +3 Con10 +0 +0 Int 7 -2 -2 Wis 10 +0 +0 Cnal0 +0 +0 Skills Stealth +5 Resistances Cold, Fire, Lightning Immunities Poison; Poisoned Senses Darkvision 120 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages Abyssal, Common CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) TRAITS Magic Resistance. The quasit has Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. ACTIONS Rend. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) Slashing damage, and the target has the Poisoned con- dition until the start of the quasit's next turn, Invisibility. The quasit casts Invisibility on itself, requir- ing no spell components and using Charisma as the spellcasting ability. Scare (1/Day). Wisdom Saving Throw: DC 10, one crea- ture within 20 feet. Failure: The target has the Fright- ened condition. At the end of each of its turns, the target repeats the save, ending the effect on itself ona success. After 1 minute, it succeeds automatically. Shape-Shift. The quasit shape-shifts to resemble a bat (Speed 10 ft., Fly 40 ft.), a centipede (40 ft., Climb 40 ft.), or a toad (40 ft., Swim 40 ft.), or it returns to its true form. Its statistics are the same in each form, ex- cept for its Speed. Any equipment it's wearing or carrying isn't transformed. \ | Beak. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing \| Tiny Beast, Unaligned AC 10 HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 20 ft., Climb 20 ft. # Mod Save Mod Save Mod Save Str 2 -4 -4 Dexll +0 +0 Con9 -1 +1 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa 4 3 3 Initiative +0 (10) Skills Perception +2 \| Senses Darkvision 30 ft., Passive Perception 12 } Languages None CRO (XP 10; PB +2) ) TRAITS Agile. The rat doesn't provoke Opportunity Attacks when it moves out of an enemy's reach. ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +2, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing damage. \<= = = RAVEN Tiny Beast, Unaligned AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) HP 2 (1d4) Speed 10 ft., Fly 50 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Stk 2 -4 -4 Dex 4 42 42 Con10 40 40 Skills Perception +3 Senses Passive Perception 13 Languages None CR 0 (XP 10; PB +2) TRAITS Mimicry. The raven can mimic simple sounds it has heard, such as a whisper or chitter. A hearer can dis- cern the sounds are imitations with a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Insight) check. ACTIONS damage. Staao Taorote (1d6 + 3) Piercing damage. | REEF SHARK | Medium Beast, Unaligned (--- seeks SCORPION \| AC 12 Initiative +2 (12): - \| HP 22 (4d8 + 4) Tiny Beast, Unaligned \| Speed 5 ft., Swim 30 ft. ACI Initiative +0 (10)! MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE HP\] (1d4 sop 1) } STR 14 42 +2 Dex15 +2 +2 Coni3 +1 +1 Speed 10 ft. \| Int 1 -5 -5 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa4 -3 -3 MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAvE \| ar Str 2 -4 -4 Dex\] +0 +0 Con8 -1 -\] \| Skills Perception +2 Ey et aa \| Senses Blindsight 30 ft., Passive Perception 12 NTA) SSM (WIS. altos CHA? aes Languages None Senses Blindsight 10 ft., Passive Perception 9 \| \| CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) Languages None \| \|; \] \| Tearrs CRO (XP 10; PB +2) \| Pack Tactics. The shark has Advantage on an attack roll ACTIONS \| against a creature if at least one of the shark's allies is Sting. Melee Attack Roll: +2, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing \| \| within 5 feet of the creature and the ally doesn't have damage plus 3 (1d6) Poison damage. \| i the Incapacitated condition. ) } Water Breathing. The shark can breathe only underwater. \|; SKELETON \| i\] \| TIONS: Medium Undead, Lawful Evil i ciaeesed ates Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (2d4 + 2) ACB Initiative +3 (13) \| { camage. ) \| HP 13 (2d8 +4) \| Speed 30 ft. } MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| RIDING Horse Str 10 +0 +0 Dex 16 +3 +3 CoNn1S +2 42 Large Beast, Unoligned Int 6 -2 -2 Wis 8 -1 -1 CHAS 3 3 - He (2d10 + 2) pipes i} Vulnerabilities Bludgeoning 5 60 ft Immunities Poison; Exhaustion, Poisoned peed ao ie ee ere Gear Shortbow, Shortsword v1\ Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 9 Str 16 3 ze Dexo3ialmesis (CON 12 'eli Languages Understands the languages it knew in life Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHa7 \~-2 -2 but can't speak Senses Passive Perception 10 CRLBIAE 50; BB +2). CR P50, PB? ae; PB +, Palas 4 ) Shortsword. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 ACTIONS Shortbow. Ranged Attack Roll: +5, range 80/320 ft. Hit: Hooves, Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 7 (1d8 + 3) Bludgeoning damage. 6 (1d6 + 3) Piercing damage. \*s ema Sey 4 | SLaaD TADPOLE Tiny Aberration, Chaotic Neutral | | Ac 12 Initiative +2 (12) | HP 7 (344) | Speed 30 ft., Burrow 10 ft. } MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE | Str 7 -2 -2 Dex15 +2 +2 Conl0 +0 +0 Int 3 -4 -4 Wis 5 -3 -3 CHa3 -4 -4 Skills Stealth +4 Resistances Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Thunder Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 7 Languages Understands Slaad but can't speak CR 1/8 (XP 25; PB +2) TRAITS Magic Resistance. The slaad has Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) Piercing damage. | | # Sphinx Of Wonder Spxinx of WonveR Tiny Celestial, Lawful Good AC 13 Initiative +3 (13) HP 24 (7d4 + 7) Speed 20 ft., Fly 40 ft. MOD # Save Mod Save Mod Save Str 6 -2 -2 Dex17 +3 +3 Con13 +1 +1 Int 15 +2 +2 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHall +0 +0 Skills Arcana +4, Religion +4, Stealth +5 Resistances Necrotic, Psychic, Radiant Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 11 Languages Celestial, Common CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) TRAITS Magic Resistance. The sphinx has Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. ACTIONS Rend. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d4 + 3) Slashing damage plus 7 (2d6) Radiant damage. REACTIONS Buvst of Ingenuity (2/Day). Trigger: The sphinx or an- other creature within 30 feet makes an ability check or a saving throw. Response: The sphinx adds 2 to the roll. # Dancen Wilkerson SPIDER Tiny Beast, Unaligned AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 20 ft., Climb 20 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 2-4 -4 Dex 14 42 42. Con 8 ait Int 1-5 5 Wis 10 4 a iG Skills Stealth +4 Senses Darkvision 30 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages None CRO (XP 10; PB +2) TRAITS. Spider Climb. The spider can climb difficult surfaces, including along ceilings, without needing to make an ability check. Web Walker. The spider ignores movement restrictions caused by webs, and the spider knows the location of any other creature in contact with the same web. ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing damage plus 2 (1d4) Poison damage. SPRITE Tiny Fey, Neutral Good AC15 Initiative +4 (14) HP 10 (4d4) Speed 10 ft., Fly 40 ft. \_MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Ste 3-4 -4 Dex18 +4 +4 Con10 +0 +0 'Int 14 42 42 Wis 13 +1 41) CHall 40 +0 Skills Perception +3, Stealth +8 Senses Passive Perception 13 Languages Common, Elvish, Sylvan CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) ACTIONS Needle Sword. Melee Attack Roll: +6, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d4 + 4) Piercing damage. Enchanting Bow. Ranged Attack Roll: +6, range '\| Skills Perception +3, Stealth +7 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 Languages None CR 1 (XP 200; PB +2) ACTIONS Multiattack. The tiger makes one Pounce attack and uses Prowl. Pounce. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 6 (1d6 - 3) Slashing damage. If the tiger had Advantage on the attack roll, the target takes an extra 3 (1d6) Slash- ing damage and, if it is Huge or smaller, has the Prone condition. Prowl. The tiger moves up to half its Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks. At the end of this # movement, the tiger can take the Hide action. --------------- (TiceR Large Beast, Unaligned AC 13 Initiative +3 (13) HP 22 (3d10 + 6) Speed 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 17 +3 +3 Dex 16 +3 +3 CONT4 42 42 Int 3 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHA 8 -\] -\] 40/160 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing damage, and the target has the Charmed condition until the start of the sprite's ner turn. VENOMOUS SNAKE Tiny Beast, Unaligned AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) HP 5 (2d4) Speed 30 ft., Swim 30 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 2 Dex 15 +2 +2 Conll +0 +0 \| Int 1-5-5 Wis 10 40 40 CHa3 -4 \<4) Senses Blindsight 10 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages None = eS WARHORSE Large Beast, Unaligned AC 11 Initiative +1 (11) HP 19 (3d10 + 3) Speed 60 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 18 +4 +4 Dex12 +1 +1 Conl3 +1 41 Int 2 -4 -4 Wis 12 +1 +3 CHA7 -2 2 Senses Passive Perception 11 Languages None CR 1/2 (XP 100; PB +2) | WoLr 'Medium Beast, Unaligned AC 12 Initiative +2 (12) i HP 11 (28 + 2) i Speed 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 1442 42) Dex 15 42 Int 3 ---4 4 Wis 2 \_MOD SAVE ) Conl2 HH | CHa 6 =2 -2 Skills Perception +5, Stealth +4 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 15 Languages None CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) TRAITS Pack Tactics. The wolf has Advantage on attack rolls against a creature if at least one of the wolf's allies is within 5 feet of the creature and the ally doesn't have the Incapacitated condition. ACTIONS Bite. Melee Attack Roll: +4, reach 5 ft. Hit: 5 (1d6 + 2) Piercing damage, and the target has the Prone condi- tion if it is Medium or smaller. XY ACTIONS dnsrpaees ae Roll: plas Sifts bs a ZOMBIE + udgeoning damage. If the horse moved at least = - 20 feet straight toward the target immediately before Medium Undead, Neutral Evil the hit, the target takes an extra 5 (2d4) Bludgeoning AC8 Initiative -2 (8) damage and, if it is Huge or smaller, has the Prone HP 15 (2d8 + 6) condition. Speed 20 ft. | Acticiss WEASEL Tiny Beast, Unaligned AC 13 Initiative +3 (13) HP 1 (1d4 - 1) Speed 30 ft., Climb 30 ft. # Mod Save Mod Save Mod Save | Dex 16 43 43 Cons ili \| Skills Acrobatics +5, Perception +3, Stealth +5 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 13 | Languayses None CRO (XP 10; PB +2) # Mod Save Mod Save Immunities Poison; Exhaustion, Poisoned Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 8 Languages Understands the languages it knew in life but can't speak | CR 1/4 (XP 50; PB +2) TRAITS Undead Fortitude. ` d`{=tex}amage reduces the zombie t Hit Points, it must make a Constitution saving TOW with a DC of 5 plus the damage taken unless t age is Radiant or from a Critical Hit uce "save,,thez zombie drops to 1 Hit te. Melee Attack Roll: +5, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1 Piercing RULES \_ APPENDIX C GLOSSARY # Glossary Conventions The glossary uses the following conventions: Tags in Brackets. Some entries have a tag in brack- ets after the entry's name, as in "Attack \[Action\]." A tag---Action, Area of Effect, Attitude, Condition, or Hazard---indicates that a rule is part of a family of rules. The tags also have glossary entries. "You." The game's rules---in this glossary and else- where---often talk about something happening to you in the game world. That "you" refers to the creature or object that the rule applies to in a par- ticular moment of play. For example, the "you" in the Prone condition is a creature that currently has that condition. "See Also." Some glossary entries include a See also section that points to other entries in the glossary, to chapters in this book, or both. No Obsolete Terms. The glossary contains defini- tions of current rules terms only. If you're looking for a term from an earlier version of the fifth edi- tion rules, consult the index. Abbreviations. The abbreviations listed below ap- pear in this glossary and elsewhere in the rules. AC Armor Class M Material c Concentration component CE Chaotic Evil N Neutral CG Chaotic Good NE Neutral Evil Cha. Charisma NG Neutral Good CN Chaotic Neutral © NPC Nonplayer Con. Constitution character CP Copper Piece(s) PB Proficiency CR Challenge Rating pons ' DC \_ Difficulty Class PP latining Piece(s) - Dex. Dexterity Ritual DM Dungeon Master sonia. component a etl Hieee SP Silver Piece(s) HP ee Ste Seen v Verbal Intelligence component XP Experience = # Rules Definitions Here are definitions of various rules. # Ability Check An ability check is a D20 Test that represents using one of the six abilities---or a specific skill associated with an ability---to overcome a challenge. See also chapter 1 ("D20 Tests" and "Proficiency").