# CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER Hit Point Dice. Your class's description tells you the die type of your character's Hit Point Dice (or Hit Dice for short); write this on your character sheet. At level 1, your character has 1 Hit Die. You can spend Hit Dice during a Short Rest to recover Hit Points. Your character sheet also includes space to note how many Hit Dice you've spent. Initiative. Write your Dexterity modifier in the space for Initiative on your character sheet. Armor Class. Without armor or a shield, your base Armor Class is 10 plus your Dexterity modifier. If your starting equipment includes armor or a Shield (or both), calculate your AC using the rules in chap- ter 6. A class feature might give you a different way to calculate your AC. Attacks. In the Weapons & Damage Cantrips section of the character sheet, write your starting weapons. The attack roll bonus for a weapon with which you have proficiency is one of the following unless a weapon's property says otherwise: Melee attack bonus = Strength modifier + Proficiency Bonus Ranged attack bonus = Dexterity modifier + Proficiency Bonus Look up the damage and properties of your weap- ons in chapter 6. You add the same ability modifier you use for attacks with a weapon to your damage rolls with that weapon. Spellcasting. Note both the saving throw DC for your spells and the attack bonus for attacks you make with them, using these formulas: Spell save DC = 8 + spellcasting ability modifier + Proficiency Bonus Spell attack bonus = spellcasting ability modifier + Proficiency Bonus Your spellcasting ability modifier for a spell is de- termined by whatever feature gives you the ability to cast the spell. Spell Slots, Cantrips, and Prepared Spells. If your class gives you the Spellcasting or Pact Magic fea- ture, your class features table shows the number of spell slots you have available, how many cantrips you know, and how many spells you can prepare. Choose your cantrips and prepared spells, and note them---along with your number of spell slots---on your character sheet. # Name Your Character Choose a name for your character, and write it on your character sheet. The name can be whatever you like. Was it the name of an ancestor? Does it have religious or other significance? Is ita name you chose for yourself? # Create Final Details As you finish creating your character, consider whether you'd like to make up any other details about the character. Here are the sorts of things you might ask yourself as the character: - What's your gender? - What person or people do you care most about? - What's your deepest fear? - On your adventures, will you seek knowledge, wealth, glory, enlightenment, justice, mercy, power, or something else? # Level Advancement While going on adventures, your character gains experience, represented by Experience Points (XP). Acharacter who reaches a specified Experience Point total advances in capability. This advance- ment is called gaining a level. The Character Advancement table lists the XP you need to advance to a level and the Proficiency Bonus for a character of that level. When your XP total equals or exceeds a number in the Experience Points column, you reach the corresponding level. # Character Advancement Level Experience Points \_ Proficiency Bonus 1 0 42 2 300 +2 3 900 +2 4 2,700 +2 5 6,500 43 6 14,000 +3 7 23,000 +3 8 34,000 +3 9 48,000 +4 10 64,000 +4 VW 85,000 +4 12 100,000 +4 13 120,000 +5 14 140,000 +5 15 165,000 +5 16 195,000 +5 V7 225,000 +6 18 265,000 +6 19 305,000 +6 20 355,000 +6 # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER # 41 Adventuring Equipment Improves As A Character Progresses Through # The Tiers Of Play. # Gaining A Level When you gain a level, follow these steps: 1: Choose a Class. Most characters advance in the same class. However, you might decide to gain a level in another class using the rules in the "Mul- ticlassing" section later in this chapter. 2: Adjust Hit Points and Hit Point Dice. Each time you gain a level, you gain an additional Hit Die. Roll that die, add your Constitution modifier to the roll, and add the total (minimum of 1) to your Hit Point maximum. Instead of rolling, you can use the fixed value shown in the Fixed Hit Points by Class table. Fixeo Hit Points By CLASS Class Hit Points per Level 7 + Con. modifier 6 + Con. modifier 5 + Con. modifier Barbarian Fighter, Paladin, or Ranger Bard, Cleric, Druid, Monk, Rogue, or Warlock Sorcerer or Wizard 4+ (Con. modifier \_ CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 3: Record New Class Features. Look at your class features table in chapter 3, and note the features you gain at your new level in that class. Make any choices offered by a new feature. 4: Adjust Proficiency Bonus. A character's Profi- ciency Bonus increases at certain levels, as shown in the Character Advancement table and your class features table in chapter 3. When your Pro- ficiency Bonus increases, increase all the num- bers on your character sheet that include your Proficiency Bonus. 5: Adjust Ability Modifiers. If you choose a feat that increases one or more of your ability scores, your ability modifier also changes if the new score is an even number. When that happens, ad- just all the numbers on your character sheet that use that ability modifier. When your Constitution modifier increases by 1, your Hit Point maximum increases by 1 for each level you have attained. For example, if a character reaches level 8 and increases their Constitution score from 17 to 18, the Constitution modifier increases to +4. The character's Hit Point maximum then increases by 8, in addition to the Hit Points gained for reach- ing level 8. BONUS FEATS AT LEVEL 20 A DM can use feats as a form of advancement after characters reach level 20 to provide greater power to characters who have no more levels to gain. With this approach, each character gains one feat of their choice for every 30,000 XP the character earns above 355,000 XP. Epic Boon feats are especially appropriate for these bonus feats, but a player can choose any feat for which their level 20 character qualifies. \~---# Tiers Of Play With each new level, characters acquire new ca- pabilities that equip them to handle greater chal- lenges. As characters advance in level, the tone of the game also changes, and the stakes of the cam- paign get higher. It's helpful to think of a character's (and a campaign's) arc in terms of four tiers of play, describing the journey from a level 1 character just beginning an adventuring career to the epic heights of level 20. These tiers don't have any rules associ- ated with them; they point to the fact that the play experience evolves as characters gain levels. Tier 1 (LEVELS 1---4) In tier 1, characters are apprentice adventurers, though they are already set apart from the broader populace by virtue of their extraordinary abilities. They learn their starting class features and choose a subclass. The threats they face usually pose a dan- ger to local farmsteads or villages. TreER 2 (LEvEts 5-10) In tier 2, characters are full-fledged adventurers. Spellcasters gain iconic spells such as Fireball, Light- ning Bolt, and Raise Dead. Most weapon-focused classes gain the ability to make multiple attacks in a round. The characters now face dangers that threaten cities and kingdoms. STARTING EQUIPMENT AT HIGHER LEVELS Starting Level Equipment and Money 2-4 Normal starting equipment 5-10 500 GP plus 1d10 x 25 GP plus normal starting equipment 11-16 5,000 gp plus 1d10 x 250 GP plus normal starting equipment 17-20 20,000 GP plus 1d10 x 250 GP plus normal starting equipment Trer 3 (Levers 11---16) In tier 3, characters have reached a level of power that makes them special among adventurers. At level 11, many spellcasters learn reality-altering spells. Other characters gain features that allow them to make more attacks or to do more impres- sive things with those attacks. These adventurers often confront threats to whole regions. Trer 4 (Levezs 17-20) At tier 4, characters achieve the pinnacle of their class features, becoming heroic archetypes. The fate of the world or even the order of the multiverse might hang in the balance during their adventures. # Starting At Higher Levels Your DM might start your group's characters at a level higher than 1. It is particularly recommended to start at level 3 if your group is composed of sea- soned D&D players. # Creating Your Character Creating a higher-level character uses the same character-creation steps outlined in this chapter and the rules for advancing beyond level 1 provided in the "Level Advancement" section. You begin with the minimum amount of XP required to reach your starting level. For example, if the DM starts you at level 10, you have 64,000 XP. # Starting Equipment The DM decides whether your character starts with more than the standard equipment for a level 1 character, possibly even one or more magic items. The Starting Equipment at Higher Levels table is a guide for the DM. Also, check with your DM about what equipment is available for you to buy with your starting money. For example, the firearms described in chapter 6 are too expensive for level 1 characters, but they might be available for purchase if your DM allows them. Magic Items 1 Common 1 Common, 1 Uncommon 2 Common, 3 Uncommon, 1 Rare 2 Common, 4 Uncommon, 3 Rare, 1 Very Rare CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 43 MULTICLASSING Multiclassing allows you to gain levels in multiple classes. With this rule, you have the option of gain- ing a level in a new class whenever you advance in level instead of gaining a level in your current class. Doing so lets you mix the abilities of those classes to realize a character concept that might not be re- flected in a single class. PREREQUISITES To qualify for a new class, you must have a score of at least 13 in the primary ability of the new class and your current classes. For example, a Barbarian who decides to multiclass into the Druid class must have Strength and Wisdom scores of 13 or higher, since Strength is the primary ability for Barbarians and Wisdom is the primary ability for Druids. # Experience Points The Experience Point cost to gain a level is based on your total character level, not your level in a partic- ular class, as shown in the Character Advancement table in this chapter. For example, if you are a level 6 Cleric / level 1 Fighter, you must gain enough XP to reach level 8 before you can take your second level as a Fighter or your seventh level as a Cleric. Hit Points AnD HiT Point DIcE You gain the Hit Points from your new class as described for levels after 1. You gain the level 1 Hit Points for a class only when your total character level is 1. Add together the Hit Dice granted by all your classes to form your pool of Hit Dice. If these dice are the same die type, you can pool them together. For example, both the Fighter and the Paladin have a di0 Hit Die, so if you are a level 5 Fighter / level 5 Paladin, you have ten d10 Hit Dice. If your classes give you Hit Dice of different types, track them sep- arately. If you are a level 5 Cleric / level 5 Paladin, for example, you have five d8 Hit Dice and five d10 Hit Dice. PROFICIENCY BONUS Your Proficiency Bonus is based on your total char- acter level, not your level in a particular class, as shown in the Character Advancement table. For example, if you are a level 3 Fighter / level 2 Rogue, you have the Proficiency Bonus of a level 5 charac- ter, which is +3. PROFICIENCIES = When you gain your first level in a class other than your initial class, you gain only some of the new class's starting proficiencies, as detailed in each class's description in chapter 3. CLASS FEATURES When you gain a new level in a class, you get its features for that level. A few features have additional rules when you're multiclassing. Check the infor- mation about multiclassing included in each of your classes' descriptions. Special rules apply to Extra Attack, Spellcasting, and features (such as Unarmored Defense) that give you alternative ways to calculate your Armor Class. ARMOR CLass If you have multiple ways to calculate your Armor Class, you can benefit from only one at a time. For example, a Monk/Sorcerer with a Monk's Unar- mored Defense feature and a Sorcerer's Draconic Resilience feature must choose only one of those features as a way to calculate Armor Class. # Extra Attack If you gain the Extra Attack feature from more than one class, the features don't stack. You can't make more than two attacks with this feature unless you have a feature that says you can (such as the Fighter's Two Extra Attacks feature). Similarly, the Warlock's Thirsting Blade invoca- tion, which grants you the Extra Attack feature with your pact weapon, doesn't give you additional attacks if you also have Extra Attack. SPELLCASTING Your capacity for spellcasting depends partly on your combined levels in all your spellcasting classes and partly on your individual levels in those classes. Once you have the Spellcasting feature from more than one class, use the rules below. If you multiclass but have the Spellcasting feature from only one class, follow the rules for that class. Spells Prepared. You determine what spells you can prepare for each class individually, as if you were a single-classed member of that class. If you are a level 4 Ranger / level 3 Sorcerer, for example, you can prepare five level 1 Ranger spells, and you can prepare six Sorcerer spells of level 1 or 2 (as well as four Sorcerer cantrips). Each spell you prepare is associated with one of your classes, and you use the spellcasting ability of that class when you cast the spell. Cantrips. If a cantrip of yours increases in power at higher levels, the increase is based on your total character level, not your level in a particular class, unless the spell says otherwise. MULTICLASS SPELLCASTER: SPELL SLOTS PER SPELL LEVEL Level 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 1 | i ea I a RA blll i a fede ah a Tel wo worUu DUA WHN eWUAarBRIGS I 9 dead Le \| ee \| ir) = hpRRR RA RAD RA RR RAHA A RWN 8 WwWwWWWWwWWwWwwwwwwwwwn WwW wWWWwWwWwwwwwwwwnwn WwW wwwwwwwwwwn wWBWWwNNNNNNNDN A NNo SSP SF SAS Se Pe fre ee ee ee ee re ee Spell Slots. You determine your available spell slots by adding together the following: - All your levels in the Bard, Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, and Wizard classes - Half your levels (round up) in the Paladin and Ranger classes - One third of your Fighter or Rogue levels (round down) if you have the Eldritch Knight or Arcane Trickster subclass. Then look up this total level in the Level column of the Multiclass Spellcaster table. You use the slots for that level to cast spells of an appropriate level from any class whose Spellcasting feature you have. This table might give you spell slots of a higher level than the spells you prepare. You can use those slots but only to cast your lower-level spells. If a lower-level spell that you cast, like Burning Hands, has an enhanced effect when cast at a higher level, you can use the enhanced effect as normal. For example, if you are a level 4 Ranger / level 3 Sorcerer, you count as a level 5 character when de- termining your spell slots, counting all your levels as a Sorcerer and half your Ranger levels. As shown in the Multiclass Spellcaster table, you have four level 1 spell slots, three level 2 slots, and two level 3 slots. However, you can't prepare any level 3 spells, # A Character With Paladin And Warlock Levels Might Call On Both A Mighty # Oath And An Otherworloly Patron. nor can you prepare any level 2 Ranger spells. You can use the spell slots of those levels to cast the spells you do prepare---and potentially enhance their effects. Pact Magic. If you have the Pact Magic feature from the Warlock class and the Spellcasting feature, you can use the spell slots you gain from Pact Magic to cast spells you have prepared from classes with the Spellcasting feature, and you can use the spell slots you gain from the Spellcasting feature to cast Warlock spells you have prepared. # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 45 21 # 22 23 # 25 26 14100 Trinket TRINKETS 7 ee When you make your character, you can roll once 27. Ashard of obsidian that always feels warm on the Trinkets table to gain a Tiny trinket, a simple item lightly touched by mystery. The DM might also use this table. It can help stock a room in a dungeon to the touch 28 Adragon's talon strung on a leather necklace or fill a creature's pockets. 29 Apair of old socks TRINKETS 30 A blank book whose pages refuse to hold 1d100 Trinket ink, chalk, graphite, or any other marking 01 Amummified goblin hand 31. Asilver badge that is a five-pointed star 02 Acrystal that faintly glows in moonlight 32. Aknife that belonged to a relative 03 Agold coin minted in an unknown land 33 Aglass vial filled with nail clippings 04 Adiary written in a language you don't know 34 Arectangular metal device with two tiny 05 A brass ring that never tarnishes metal cups on one end that throws sparks when wet i fi t ee ee a Re os 35 Awhite, sequined glove sized for a human 07 Apair of knucklebone dice, each with a skull;: symbol on the side that would normally 36 Avest with one hundred tiny pockets show six pips 37 Aweightless stone 08 Asmall idol depicting a nightmarish crea- 38 Asketch of a goblin ture that gives you unsettling dreams when 39 Anempty glass vial that smells of perfume you sleep near it 40 Agemstone that looks like a lump of coal A lock of someone's hair when examined by anyone but you The deed for a parcel of land in a realm un- 41 Ascrap of cloth from an old banner known to you 42 Arank insignia from a lost legionnaire A 1-ounce block made from an unknown 43 Asilver bell without a clapper material 44 Amechanical canary inside a lamp A small cloth doll skewered with needles 45 Aminiature chest carved to look like it has A tooth from an unknown beast numerous feet on the bottom An enormous scale, perhaps from a dragon 46 Adead sprite inside a clear glass bottle A bright-green feather 47 Ametal can that has no opening but sounds as if it is filled with liquid, sand, spiders, or broken glass (your choice) 48 --- Aglass orb filled with water, in which swims a clockwork goldfish An old divination card bearing your likeness A glass orb filled with moving smoke A 1-pound egg with a bright-red shell A pipe that blows bubbles A glass jar containing a bit of flesh floating 49 Asilver spoon with an M engraved on the in pickling fluid handle A gnome-crafted music box that plays 50 Awhistle made from gold-colored wood a song you dimly remember from your 51 Adead scarab beetle the size of your hand childhood 52 Two toy soldiers, one missing a head A wooden statuette of a smug halfling A brass orb etched with strange runes A multicolored stone disk Asilver icon of a raven A bag containing forty-seven teeth, one of which is rotten CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 1d100 Trinket 53 # 54 55 56 57 58 59 60 61 62 63 64 65 # 66 67 68 69 70 val 72 73 74 # 75 76 77 78 79 80 81 82 A srnall box filled with different-sized buttons A candle that can't be lit A miniature cage with no door An old key An indecipherable treasure map Ahilt from a broken sword Arabbit's foot A glass eye A cameo of a hideous person A silver skull the size of a coin An alabaster mask A cone of sticky black incense that stinks A nightcap that gives you pleasant dreams when you wear it A single caltrop made from bone A gold monocle frame without the lens A 1-inch cube, each side a different color A crystal doorknob A packet filled with pink dust A fragment of a beautiful song, written as musical notes on two pieces of parchment A silver teardrop earring containing a real teardrop An eggshell painted with scenes of misery in disturbing detail A fan that, when unfolded, shows a sleepy cat A set of bone pipes A four-leaf clover pressed inside a book dis- cussing manners and etiquette A sheet of parchment upon which is drawn a mechanical contraption An ornate scabbard that fits no blade you have found An invitation to a party where a murder happened A bronze pentacle with an etching of a rat's head in its center A purple handkerchief embroidered with the name of an archmage Half a floor plan for a temple, a castle, or another structure 1d100 Trinket 83 # 84 85 86 # 87 88 89 90 91 92 93 94 # 95 96 97 98 99 00 A bit of folded cloth that, when unfolded, turns into a stylish cap A receipt of deposit at a bank in a far-off city A diary with seven missing pages An empty silver snuffbox bearing the inscrip- tion "dreams" on its lid An iron holy symbol devoted to an unknown god A book about a legendary hero's rise and fall, with the last chapter missing A vial of dragon blood An ancient arrow of elven design A needle that never bends An ornate brooch of dwarven design An empty wine bottle bearing a pretty label that says, "The Wizard of Wines Winery, Red Dragon Crush, 331422-W" A mosaic tile with a multicolored, glazed surface A petrified mouse A black pirate flag adorned with a dragon's skull and crossbones A tiny mechanical crab or spider that moves about when it's not being observed A glass jar containing lard with a label that reads, "Griffon Grease" A wooden box with a ceramic bottom that holds a living worm with a head on each end of its body A metal urn containing the ashes of a hero ---" # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 47 \| AND RINGLERUN PROTECT A PORTAL TO ANOTHER PLANE FROM # Diabolicalinvaders. --- tf i nu i cre # Chapter 3 =, HARACTER CLASS PROVIDES A CHARACTER'S most exciting capabilities. This chapter offers? twelve classes, each of which contains four subclasses---all summarized below. Barbarian. Storm with Rage, and wade into hand- to-hand combat. Then follow the Path of the... Berserker to unleash raw violence. Wild Heart to manifest kinship with animals. World Tree to tap into cosmic vitality. Zealot to rage in union with a god. Bard. Perform spells that inspire and heal allies or beguile foes. Then join the College of... Dance to harness agility in battle. Glamour to weave beguiling Feywild magic. Lore to collect knowledge and magical secrets. Valor to wield weapons with spells. Cleric. Invoke divine magic to heal, bolster, and smite. Then harness the... Life Domain to be a master of healing. Light Domain to wield searing, warding light. Trickery Domain to bedevil foes with mischief. War Domain to inspire valor and chastise foes. Druid. Channel nature magic to heal, shape-shift, and control the elements. Then join the Circle of the... Land to draw on the magic of the environment. Moon to adopt powerful animal forms. Sea to channel tides and storms. Stars to gain powers in a starry form. Fighter. Master all weapons and armor. Then em- body the... Battle Master to use special combat maneuvers. Champion to strive for peak combat prowess. Eldritch Knight to learn spells to aid in combat. Psi Warrior to augment attacks with psionic power. by Monk. Dart in and out of melee while striking fast \_. and hard. Then become a Warrior of... Mercy to heal or harm with a touch. Shadow to employ shadows for subterfuge. The Elements to wield elemental power. The Open Hand to master unarmed combat. # Character Classes \_--- Paladin. Smite foes and shield allies with divine and martial might. Then swear the Oath of... Devotion to emulate the angels of justice. Glory to reach the heights of heroism. The Ancients to preserve life, joy, and nature. Vengeance to hunt down evildoers. Ranger. Weave together martial prowess, nature magic, and survival skills. Then embody the... Beast Master to bond with a primal beast. Fey Wanderer to manifest fey mirth and fury. Gloom Stalker to hunt foes that lurk in darkness. Hunter to protect nature with martial versatility. Rogue. Launch deadly Sneak Attacks while avoid- ing harm through stealth. Then embody the... Arcane Trickster to enhance stealth with spells. Assassin to deliver ambushes and poison. Soulknife to strike foes with psi blades. Thief to master infiltration and treasure hunting. Sorcerer. Wield magic innate to your being, shap- ing the power to your will. Then channel... Aberrant Sorcery to use strange psionic magic. Clockwork Sorcery to harness cosmic forces of order. Draconic Sorcery to breathe the magic of dragons. Wild Magic to unleash chaos magic. Warlock. Cast spells derived from occult knowl- edge. Then form a pact with the... Archfey Patron to teleport and wield fey magic. Celestial Patron to heal with heavenly magic. Fiend Patron to call on sinister powers. Great Old One Patron to delve into forbidden lore. Wizard. Study Arcane magic and master spells for every purpose. Then embody the... Abjurer to shield allies and banish foes. Diviner to learn the multiverse's secrets. Evoker to create explosive effects. Illusionist to weave spells of deception. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 4é A Fierce Warrior of Primal Rage Core BARBARIAN TRAITS Primary Ability Hit Point Die Saving Throw Proficiencies Strength D12 per Barbarian level Strength and Constitution Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: Animal Handling, Athletics, Intimidation, Na- ture, Perception, or Survival Weapon Proficiencies Simple and Martial weapons Armor Training Light and Medium armor and Shields Choose A or B: (A) Greataxe, 4 Handaxes, Explorer's Pack, and 15 GP; or (B) 75 GP Starting Equipment Bim) ARBARIANS ARE MIGHTY WARRIORS WHO. =. are powered by primal forces of the multi- -.' verse that manifest as a Rage. More thana mere emotion---and not limited to anger---this Rage is an incarnation of a predator's ferocity, a storm's fury, and a sea's turmoil. Some Barbarians personify their Rage as a fierce spirit or revered forebear. Others see it as a con- nection to the pain and anguish of the world, as an impersonal tangle of wild magic, or as an expression of their own deepest self. For every Barbarian, their Rage is a power that fuels not just battle prowess, but also uncanny reflexes and heightened senses. Barbarians often serve as protectors and leaders in their communities. They charge headlong into danger so those under their protection don't have to. Their courage in the face of danger makes Bar- barians perfectly suited for adventure. # Becoming A Barbarian... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Barbarian Traits table. - Gain the Barbarian's level 1 features, which are listed in the Barbarian Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the following traits from the Core Barbarian Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency with Mar- tial weapons, and training with Shields. - Gain the Barbarian's level 1 features, which are listed in the Barbarian Features table. #, Barbarian Class Features As a Barbarian, you gain the following class fea- tures when you reach the specified Barbarian levels. These features are listed in the Barbarian Features table. LEVEL \|: RAGE You can imbue yourself with a primal power called Rage, a force that grants you extraordinary might and resilience. You can enter it as a Bonus Action if you aren't wearing Heavy armor. You can enter your Rage the number of times shown for your Barbarian level in the Rages column of the Barbarian Features table. You regain one ex- pended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. While active, your Rage follows the rules below. Damage Resistance. You have Resistance to Blud- geoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage. Rage Damage. When you make an attack using Strength---with either a weapon or an Unarmed Strike---and deal damage to the target, you gain a bonus to the damage that increases as you gain levels as a Barbarian, as shown in the Rage Damage column of the Barbarian Features table. Strength Advantage. You have Advantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws. No Concentration or Spells. You can't maintain Concentration, and you can't cast spells. Duration. The Rage lasts until the end of your next turn, and it ends early if you don Heavy armor or have the Incapacitated condition. If your Rage is still active on your next turn, you can extend the Rage for another round by doing one of the following: - Make an attack roll against an enemy. - Force an enemy to make a saving throw. - Take a Bonus Action to extend your Rage. Each time the Rage is extended, it lasts until the end of your next turn. You can maintain a Rage for up to 10 minutes. LEVEL 1: UNARMORED DEFENSE While you aren't wearing any armor, your base Ar- mor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Consti- tution modifiers. You can use a Shield and still gain this benefit. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 51 # Barbarian Features Rage Weapon Proficiency Rages Damage Mastery Level Bonus Class Features: \~: 1 +2 Rage, Unarmored Defense, Weapon Mastery 2 +2 Danger Sense, Reckless Attack 2 +2 2 3 +2 Barbarian Subclass, Primal Knowledge 3 +2 2 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement 3 +2 3 5 +3 Extra Attack, Fast Movement 3 +2 3 6 +3 Subclass feature 4 +2 3 7 +3 Feral Instinct, Instinctive Pounce 4 +2 3 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 4 +2 3 9 +4 Brutal Strike 4 +3 3 10 +4 Subclass feature 4 +3 4 nN +4 Relentless Rage 4 +3 4 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement \> +3 4 13 +5 Improved Brutal Strike 5 +3 4 14 +5 Subclass feature 5 +3 4 15 +5 Persistent Rage 5 +3 4 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 5 +4 4 7 +6 Improved Brutal Strike 6 +4 4 18 +6 Indomitable Might 6 +4 4 19 +6 Epic Boon 6 +4 4 20 +6 Primal Champion 6 +4 4 LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of two kinds of Simple or Mar- tial Melee weapons of your choice, such as Great- axes and Handaxes. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can practice weapon drills and change one of those weapon choices. When you reach certain Barbarian levels, you gain the ability to use the mastery properties of more kinds of weapons, as shown in the Weapon Mastery column of the Barbarian Features table. LEVEL 2: DANGER SENSE You gain an uncanny sense of when things aren't as they should be, giving you an edge when you dodge perils. You have Advantage on Dexterity saving throws unless you have the Incapacitated condition. LEVEL 2: RECKLESS ATTACK You can throw aside all concern for defense to at- tack with increased ferocity. When you make your first attack roll on your turn, you can decide to at- tack recklessly. Doing so gives you Advantage on at- tack rolls using Strength until the start of your next turn, but attack rolls against you have Advantage during that time. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES LeveL 3: BARBARIAN SUBCLASS You gain a Barbarian subclass of your choice. The Path of the Berserker, Path of the Wild Heart, Path of the World Tree, and Path of the Zealot subclasses are detailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at cer- tain Barbarian levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Barbarian level or lower. LEVEL 3: PRIMAL KNOWLEDGE You gain proficiency in another skill of your choice from the skill list available to Barbarians at level 1. In addition, while your Rage is active, you can channel primal power when you attempt certain tasks; whenever you make an ability check using one of the following skills, you can make it as a Strength check even if it normally uses a differ- ent ability: Acrobatics, Intimidation, Perception, Stealth, or Survival. When you use this ability, your Strength represents primal power coursing through you, honing your agility, bearing, and senses. LeveL 4: Aniiiry SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Barbarian levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: ExTRA ATTACK You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. LEVEL 5: Fast MOVEMENT Your speed increases by 10 feet while you aren't wearing Heavy armor. LEVEL 7: FERAL INSTINCT Your instincts are so honed that you have Advan- tage on Initiative rolls. LEVEL 7: INSTINCTIVE POUNCE As part of the Bonus Action you take to enter your Rage, you can move up to half your Speed. LEVEL 9: BRUTAL STRIKE If you use Reckless Attack, you can forgo any Ad- vantage on one Strength-based attack roll of your choice on your turn. The chosen attack roll mustn't have Disadvantage. If the chosen attack roll hits, the target takes an extra 1d10 damage of the same type dealt by the weapon or Unarmed Strike, and you can cause one Brutal Strike effect of your choice. You have the following effect options. Forceful Blow. The target is pushed 15 feet straight away from you. You can then move up to half your Speed straight toward the target without provoking Opportunity Attacks. Hamstring Blow. The target's Speed is reduced by 15 feet until the start of your next turn. A target can be affected by only one Hamstring Blow at a time--- the most recent one. LEVEL 1\]: RELENTLESS RAGE Your Rage can keep you fighting despite grievous wounds. If you drop to O Hit Points while your Rage is active and don't die outright, you can make a DC 10 Constitution saving throw. If you succeed, your Hit Points instead change to a number equal to twice your Barbarian level. Each time you use this feature after the first, the DC increases by 5. When you finish a Short or Long Rest, the DC resets to 10. LEVEL 13: IMPROVED BRUTAL STRIKE You have honed new ways to attack furiously. The following effects are now among your Brutal Strike options. Staggering Blow. The target has Disadvantage on the next saving throw it makes, and it can't make F Opportunity Attacks until the start of your next z turn. Sundering Blow. Before the start of your next turn, the next attack roll made by another creature against the target gains a +5 bonus to the roll. An attack roll can gain only one Sundering Blow bonus. LEVEL 15: PERSISTENT RAGE When you roll Initiative, you can regain all ex- pended uses of Rage. After you regain uses of Rage in this way, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. In addition, your Rage is so fierce that it now lasts for 10 minutes without you needing to do anything to extend it from round to round. Your Rage ends early if you have the Unconscious condition (not just the Incapacitated condition) or don Heavy armor. LEVEL 17: IMPROVED BRUTAL STRIKE The extra damage of your Brutal Strike increases to 2d10. In addition, you can use two different Brutal Strike effects whenever you use your Brutal Strike feature. LEVEL 18: INDOMITABLE MIGHT If your total for a Strength check or Strength sav- ing throw is less than your Strength score, you can use that score in place of the total. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Irresistible Offense is recommended. LEVEL 20: PRIMAL CHAMPION You embody primal power. Your Strength and Con- stitution scores increase by 4, to a maximum of 25. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 53 a «oF THe BERS BARBARIAN SUBCLASSE: A Barbarian subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Path of the Ber- serker, Path of the Wild Heart, Path of the World Tree, and Path of the Zealot subclasses. PATH OF THE BERSERKER Channel Rage into Violent Fury Barbarians who walk the Path of the Berserker direct their Rage primarily toward violence. Their path is one of untrammeled fury, and they thrill in the chaos of battle as they allow their Rage to seize and empower them. LEVEL 3: FRENZY If you use Reckless Attack while your Rage is active, you deal extra damage to the first target you hit on your turn with a Strength-based attack. To deter- mine the extra damage, roll a number of d6s equal to your Rage Damage bonus, and add them together. The damage has the same type as the weapon or Unarmed Strike used for the attack. LEVEL 6: MINDLESS RAGE You have Immunity to the Charmed and Fright- ened conditions while your Rage is active. If you're Charmed or Frightened when you enter your Rage, the condition ends on you. LEVEL 10: RETALIATION When you take damage from a creature that is within 5 feet of you, you can take a Reaction to make one melee attack against that creature, using a weapon or an Unarmed Strike. LEVEL 14: INTIMIDATING PRESENCE As a Bonus Action, you can strike terror into others with your menacing presence and primal power. When you do so, each creature of your choice ina 30-foot Emanation originating from you must make a Wisdom saving throw (DC 8 plus your Strength modifier and Proficiency Bonus). On a failed save, a creature has the Frightened condition for 1 min- ute. At the end of each of the Frightened creature's turns, the creature repeats the save, ending the ef- fect on itself on a success. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a use of your Rage (no action required) to restore your use of it. PATH OF 2. % WILD HEART Walk in Community with the Animal World Barbarians who follow the Path of the Wild Heart view themselves as kin to animals. These Barbar- ians learn magical means to communicate with an- imals, and their Rage heightens their connection to animals as it fills them with supernatural might. LEVEL 3: ANIMAL SPEAKER You can cast the Beast Sense and Speak with Animals spells but only as Rituals. Wisdom is your spellcast- ing ability for them. ere LEVEL 3: RAGE OF THE WILDS Your Rage taps into the primal power of animals. Whenever you activate your Rage, you gain one of the following options of your choice. Bear. While your Rage is active, you have Resis- tance to every damage type except Force, Necrotic, Psychic, and Radiant. Eagle. When you activate your Rage, you can take the Disengage and Dash actions as part of that Bo- nus Action. While your Rage is active, you can take a Bonus Action to take both of those actions. Wolf. While your Rage is active, your allies have Advantage on attack rolls against any enemy of yours within 5 feet of you. a LEVEL 6: ASPECT OF THE WILDS You gain one of the following options of your choice. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your choice. Owl. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision, its range increases by 60 feet. Panther. You have a Climb Speed equal to your Speed. Salmon. You have a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. LEVEL 10: NATURE SPEAKER You can cast the Commune with Nature spell but only as a Ritual. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for it. LEvEL 14: POWER OF THE WILDS Whenever you activate your Rage, you gain one of the following options of your choice. Falcon. While your Rage is active, you have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed if you aren't wearing any armor. Lion. While your Rage is active, any of your ene- mies within 5 feet of you have Disadvantage on at- tack rolls against targets other than you or another Barbarian who has this option active. Ram. While your Rage is active, you can cause a Large or smaller creature to have the Prone condi- tion when you hit it with a melee attack. Patw oF tHE Wito Heart Suscias PATH OF THE WORLD TREE fATH YS Trace the Roots and Branches of the Multiverse Barbarians who follow the Path of the World Tree connect with the cosmic tree Yggdrasil through their Rage. This tree grows among the Outer Planes, connecting them to each other and the Material Plane. These Barbarians draw on the tree's magic for vitality and as a means of dimensional travel. LEVEL 3: VITALITY OF THE TREE Your Rage taps into the life force of the World Tree. You gain the following benefits. Vitality Surge. When you activate your Rage, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Barbarian level. Life-Giving Force. At the start of each of your turns while your Rage is active, you can choose another creature within 10 feet of yourself to gain Temporary Hit Points. To determine the number of Temporary Hit Points, roll a number of d6s equal to your Rage Damage bonus, and add them together. If any of these Temporary Hit Points remain when your Rage ends, they vanish. LEVEL 6: BRANCHES OF THE TREE Whenever a creature you can see starts its turn within 30 feet of you while your Rage is active, you can take a Reaction to summon spectral branches of the World Tree around it. The target must suc- ceed on a Strength saving throw (DC 8 plus your Strength modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or be tele- ported to an unoccupied space you can see within 5 feet of yourself or in the nearest unoccupied space you can see. After the target teleports, you can re- duce its Speed to O until the end of the current turn. LEVEL 10: BATTERING ROOTS During your turn, your reach is 10 feet greater with any Melee weapon that has the Heavy or Versatile property, as tendrils of the World Tree extend from you. When you hit with such a weapon on your turn, you can activate the Push or Topple mastery property in addition to a different mastery property you're using with that weapon. LEVEL 14; TRAVEL ALONG THE TREE When you activate your Rage and as a Bonus Action while your Rage is active, you can teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. In addition, once per Rage, you can increase the range of that teleport to 150 feet. When you do so, you can also bring up to six willing creatures who are within 10 feet of you. Each creature teleports to an unoccupied space of your choice within 10 feet of your destination space, PaTH OF THE ZEALOT Rage in Ecstatic Union with a God Barbarians who walk the Path of the Zealot receive boons from a god or pantheon. These Barbarians experience their Rage as an ecstatic episode of divine union that infuses them with power. They are often allies to the priests and other followers of their god or pantheon. LEVEL 3: DIVINE FuRY You can channel divine power into your strikes. On each of your turns while your Rage is active, the first creature you hit with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike takes extra damage equal to 1d6 plus half your Barbarian level (round down). The extra dam- age is Necrotic or Radiant; you choose the type each time you deal the damage. LEVEL 3: WARRIOR OF THE GODS A divine entity helps ensure you can continue the fight. You have a pool of four d12s that you can spend to heal yourself. As a Bonus Action, you can expend dice from the pool, roll them, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to the roll's total. Your pool regains all expended dice when you fin- ish a Long Rest. The pool's maximum number of dice increases by one when you reach Barbarian levels 6 (5 dice), 12 (6 dice), and 17 (7 dice). LEVEL 6: FANATICAL Focus Once per active Rage, if you fail a saving throw, you can reroll it with a bonus equal to your Rage Dam- age bonus, and you must use the new roll. LEVEL 10: ZEALOUS PRESENCE As a Bonus Action, you unleash a battle cry infused with divine energy. Up to ten other creatures of your choice within 60 feet of you gain Advantage on attack rolls and saving throws until the start of your next turn. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a use of your Rage (no action required) to restore your use of it. LEVEL 14: RAGE OF THE Gops When you activate your Rage, you can assume the form of a divine warrior. This form lasts for 1 min- ute or until you drop to 0 Hit Points. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. While in this form, you gain the benefits below. Flight. You have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed and can hover. Resistance. You have Resistance to Necrotic, Psy- chic, and Radiant damage. Revivification. When a creature within 30 feet of you would drop to O Hit Points, you can take a Reaction to expend a use of your Rage to instead change the target's Hit Points to a number equal to your Barbarian level. Paty of tHe Zeacor Suscias