# CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME woe Stay on your feet in a tricky situation, or perform an acrobatic stunt. Calm or train an animal, or get an animal to behave in a certain way. Recall lore about spells, magic items, and the planes of existence. Jump farther than normal, stay afloat in rough water, or break something. Tell a convincing lie, or wear a disguise convincingly. Recall lore about historical events, people, nations, and cultures. Discern a person's mood and intentions. Awe or threaten someone into doing what you want. Find obscure information in books, or deduce how something works. Diagnose an illness, or determine what killed the recently slain. Recall lore about terrain, plants, animals, and weather. Using a combination of senses, notice something that's easy to miss. Act, tell a story, perform music, or dance. Honestly and graciously convince someone of something. Recall lore about gods, religious rituals, and holy symbols. Pick a pocket, conceal a handheld object, or perform legerdemain. Escape notice by moving quietly and hiding behind things. Follow tracks, forage, find a trail, or avoid natural hazards. # Saving Throw Proficiencies Proficiency in a saving throw lets a character add their Proficiency Bonus to saves that use a partic- ular ability. For example, proficiency in Wisdom saves lets you add your Proficiency Bonus to your Wisdom saves. Some monsters also have saving throw proficiencies, as noted in their stat blocks. Each class gives proficiency in at least two saving throws, representing that class's training in evading or resisting certain threats. Wizards, for example, are proficient in Intelligence and Wisdom saves; they train to resist mental assault. EQUIPMENT PROFICIENCIES = A character gains proficiency with various weapons and tools from their class and background. There are two categories of equipment proficiency: Weapons. Anyone can wield a weapon, but profi- ciency makes you better at wielding it. If you have proficiency with a weapon, you add your Profi- ciency Bonus to attack rolls you make with it. Tools. If you have proficiency with a tool, you can add your Proficiency Bonus to any ability check you make that uses the tool. If you have Profi- ciency in the skill that's also used with that check, you have Advantage on the check too. This means you can benefit from both skill proficiency and tool proficiency on the same ability check. ACTIONS When you do something other than moving or communicating, you typically take an action. The Action table lists the game's main actions, which are defined in more detail in the rules glossary. ACTIONS Action Summary Attack Attack with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike. Dash For the rest of the turn, give yourself extra movement equal to your Speed. Disengage Your movement doesn't provoke Oppor- tunity Attacks for the rest of the turn. Dodge Until the start of your next turn, attack rolls against you have Disadvantage, and you make Dexterity saving throws with Advantage. You lose this benefit if you have the Incapacitated condition or if your Speed is 0. Help Help another creature's ability check or attack roll, or administer first aid. Make a Dexterity (Stealth) check. Make a Charisma (Deception, Intimi- dation, Performance, or Persuasion) or Wisdom (Animal Handling) check to alter a creature's attitude. Hide Influence Magic Cast a spell, use a magic item, or use a magical feature. Ready Prepare to take an action in response to a trigger you define. Make a Wisdom (Insight, Medicine, Perception, or Survival) check. Search Study Make an Intelligence (Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature, or Religion) check. Utilize Use a nonmagical object. Player characters and monsters can also do things not covered by these actions. Many class features and other abilities provide additional action options, and you can improvise other actions. When you de- scribe an action not detailed elsewhere in the rules, the Dungeon Master tells you whether that action is possible and what kind of D20 Test you need to make, if any. # One Thing At A Time The game uses actions to govern how much you can do at one time. You can take only one action at a time. This principle is most important in combat, as explained in "Combat" later in this chapter. Actions can come up in other situations, too: in a social interaction, you can try to Influence a crea- ture or use the Search action to read the creature's body language, but you can't do both at the same time. And when you're exploring a dungeon, you can't simultaneously use the Search action to look for traps and use the Help action to aid another character who's trying to open a stuck door (with the Utilize action). Bonus ACTIONS Various class features, spells, and other abilities let you take an additional action on your turn called a Bonus Action. The Cunning Action feature, for ex- ample, allows a Rogue to take a Bonus Action. You can take a Bonus Action only when a special ability, a spell, or another feature of the game states that you can do something as a Bonus Action. You other- wise don't have a Bonus Action to take. 'You can take only one Bonus Action on your turn, so you must choose which Bonus Action to use if you have more than one available. You choose when to take a Bonus Action during your turn unless the Bonus Action's timing is spec- ified. Anything that deprives you of your ability to take actions also prevents you from taking a Bonus Action. REACTIONS Certain special abilities, spells, and situations allow you to take a special action called a Reaction. A Reaction is an instant response to a trigger of some kind, which can occur on your turn or on someone else's. The Opportunity Attack, described later in this chapter, is the most common type of Reaction. When you take a Reaction, you can't take another one until the start of your next turn. If the reaction interrupts another creature's turn, that creature can continue its turn right after the Reaction. In terms of timing, a Reaction takes place immedi- ately after its trigger unless the Reaction's descrip- tion says otherwise. \_ \_ What Woutb Your CHARACTER Do? Ask yourself as you play, "What would my char- acter do?" Playing a role involves some amount of getting into another person's head and understanding what motivates them and how those motivations translate into action. In D&D, those actions unfold against the backdrop of a fantastic world full of situations we can only imagine. How does your character react to those situations? This advice comes with one important caveat: avoid character choices that ruin the fun of the other players and the DM. Choose actions that delight you and your friends. --- # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME # 15 Social Interaction During their adventures, player characters meet many different people and face some monsters that would rather talk than fight. In those situations, it's time for social interaction, which takes many forms. For example, you might try to convince a burglar to confess to wrongdoing or try to flatter a guard. The Dungeon Master assumes the roles of any non- player characters who are participating. An NPC's attitude toward your character is Friendly, Indifferent, or Hostile, as defined in the rules glossary. Friendly NPCs are predisposed to help, and Hostile ones are inclined to hinder. Social interactions progress in two ways: through roleplaying and ability checks. ROLEPLAYING Roleplaying is, literally, the act of playing out a role. In this case, it's you as a player determining how your character thinks, acts, and talks. Roleplaying is part of every aspect of the game, and it comes to the fore during social interactions. As you roleplay, consider whether you prefer an active approach or a descriptive approach, each of which is described in "Social Interaction Example." The DM uses an NPC's personality and your char- acter's actions and attitudes to determine how an NPC reacts. A cowardly bandit might buckle under # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME # Characters Lay On The Charm While Bartering For Magic Items With A # Green Hag. threats of imprisonment. A stubborn merchant refuses to help if the characters badger her. A vain dragon laps up flattery. When interacting with an NPC, pay attention to the DM's portrayal of the NPC's personality. You might be able to learn an NPC's goals and then use that information to influence the NPC. If you offer NPCs something they want or play on their sympathies, fears, or goals, you can form friendships, ward off violence, or learn a key piece of information. On the other hand, if you insult a proud warrior or speak ill of a noble's allies, your efforts to convince or deceive will likely fail. # Ability Checks Ability checks can be key in determining the out- come of a social interaction. Your roleplaying ef- forts can alter an NPC's attitude, but there might still be an element of chance if the DM wants dice to play a role in determining an NPC's response to you. In such situations, the DM will typically ask you to take the Influence action. Pay attention to your skill proficiencies when thinking of how you will interact with an NPC; use an approach that relies on your group's skill profi- ciencies. For example, if the group needs to trick a guard into letting them into a castle, the Rogue who is proficient in Deception should lead the discussion. SOCIAL INTERACTION EXAMPLE In this scene, players engage in a social interaction encounter. You and your group determine how similar scenes play out in your adventures. Four adventurers---Shreeve, Mirabella, Auro, and Gareth---have traveled to the Blood on the Vine tavern:; f in the grim village of Barovia. Active Roleplaying. Notice throughout the example how Russell and Amy actively role- play their characters' behavior. In this active approach, they speak with their characters' Jared (as DM): This tavern might have been finely appointed once, but it has grown shoddy with the voices, like an actor taking on a role. The passage of years. A blazing fire in the hearth barely players might even echo their characters' gives any warmth to the room. You see a man body language. They still need to describe behind the counter, methodically cleaning glasses. things that can't reasonably be acted out. Three older women huddle together at one table. And a handsome young man sits by himself at a corner table, sipping a glass of wine. He looks Zz up as you enter, but the other people ignore you. Descriptive Roleplaying. Notice how Phillip "Welcome to Barovia," he says. He holds a coin describes his character's words and action. toward the bartender: "A pitcher for the visitors." Drawing on his mental image of his char- The glint of silver catches the server's attention. acter, he says what his character does and; Maeve (as Mirabella): "Thank you, friend. May we how the character does it. If this approach is know to whom we're indebted?" most comfortable for you, keep these things Jared: "\| am Ismark Kolyanovich, though around in mind: here, \| am often called Ismark the Lesser." \| + Describe your character's emotions and Russell (as Shreeve): "That's unfortunate." attitude. oe Jared: "Indeed. \| hope one day to live up to my fa- + Focus on your character s intent and how ther's example and rid myself of that title. And so, \| others might perceive it. 30 + Provide as much embellishment as you my new friends, who are you?: eo " i} feel comfortable with. Amy (as Auro): "I'm Auro. Russell: "Shreeve." Don't worry about getting things exactly Phillip (as Gareth): "My name is Gareth." ae ve bak your character oo \| Maeve (as Mirabella): "I'm called Mirabella. You said oj;ane describe wnat you'see iyour mind. your name was Kolyanovich. Are you related to --- 7, Kolyan Indirovich, the burgomaster of this town?" Jared: He looks a little surprised. He says, "Kolyan Indirovich is my esteemed father, yes." Ability Checks. Phillip's character, Gareth, Maeve: "Then he's the one who summoned us!" \| makes a Wisdom (Insight) check to deter- show him the letter that drew us here. mine whether he reads Ismark's unspoken Phillip: \| watch his reaction as he reads it. cues. Wisdom is the ability that measures \| Jared: He reaches for the letter but pulls back before perceptiveness and intuition. Insight reflects fouching it: "That seal---it's not my father's" a character's skill at reading other people's Gareth k Wisd anerehiichoce \$ moods and intentions. The DM set the DC Satie c ae me if. opr (Insignt)icheck: at 15, which Gareth beats. With a successful illip: Gareth got 18.? ---,: Wisdom (Insight) check, Gareth gleans in- Jared: You notice that Ismark is trying to conceal his formation that wasn't obvious, so it wasn't terror. He's afraid to even touch the letter's seal. part of the DM's earlier narration. For more Phillip: \| ask him what's frightening him. information, see "Ability Scores" and "Profi- Russell: "Yeah, whose seal is it?" ciency" earlier in this chapter and the Search Jared: "The Devil Strahd." action in the rules glossary. Amy: "Sounds like a pleasant fellow." Jared: "No! He is the vampire lord of Castle Raven- loft and a plague to my sister. You must help her!" Amy: "So Strahd wrote this letter, pretending to be the burgomaster, imploring us to come to Barovia and rescue Ireena Kolyana from a deadly affliction... which is him? Why would he do that?" Russell: "Why would he want us to come here?" Maeve: "Clearly, he doesn't think we're a threat." Amy: "Well, he hasn't met us yet!" Jared: "He's toying with you. He delights in the de- struction of all things good, like my dear sister." Phillip: Gareth draws closer and compassionately asks Ismark whether his sister has been bitten by the vampire. Jared: Please make a Charisma (Persuasion) check to see how well he responds to your pastoral manner. You have Advantage because he's Friendly. Phillip: Oh, good thing. My first roll was a 7, but with Advantage... ugh, not much better. Well, 10 plus Sis 15. Jared: Ismark leans toward you, Gareth, with a suspi- cious glance at the other people in the tavern, like he's worried they're eavesdropping. He whispers, "The Devil Strahd desires to make Ireena his latest plaything. Twice he has visited her in the night, using his devilry to secure an invitation into the house---for he can't enter where he isn't invited. Twice he has bitten her, yet she clings to life. But \| fear she won't survive another visit!" Russell: "All right, Ismark. You bought us drinks and told us about the Devil Strahd and your sister. How can we help?" 18. CHAPTER1\| PLAYING THE GAME Jared: "You are too kind! First, \| need your help transporting Ireena to the town of Vallaki." Maeve: "Where's Vallaki?" Jared: "It lies to the northwest, in the heart of the valley. As the raven flies, it is less than ten miles, but the road winds among the hills and woods, and the journey takes at least five hours at speed." Russell: "And why there?" Jared: "The town lies beyond the view of Castle Ravenloft, so \| hope it's beyond Strahd's spies. And \| have heard that Vallaki is well defended, with a wooden palisade and iron gates." Russell: "As if such defenses would stop a vampire." Jared: "Indeed. But if moving her there can keep him away from her for even a few days, we have time for the second part of our task." Russell: "A part where you help us?" Jared: "Yes, when \| help you face the vampire!" @ Influencing NPCs. Gareth takes the Influence action (see the rules glossary), which charac- ters can take to influence an NPC. It's easier to influence an NPC who's already disposed to help you, as Ismark is here. Ismark's Friendly attitude gives Phillip Advantage on the roll. In this case, Advantage made the difference between success and failure. EXPLORATION Exploration involves delving into places that are dangerous and full of mystery. The rules in this section detail some of the ways adventurers interact with the environment in such places. As adventurers explore, their equipment can help them in many ways. For example, they can reach out-of-the-way places with a Ladder, perceive things they wouldn't otherwise notice with a Torch or another light source, bypass locked doors and con- tainers with Thieves' Tools, and create obstacles for pursuers with Caltrops. See chapter 6 for rules on many items that are useful on adventures. The items in that chapter's "Tools" and "Adventuring Gear" sections are especially useful. The weapons in that chapter can also be used for more than battle; you could use a Quarterstaff, for example, to push a sinister-looking button that you're reluctant to touch. # Vision And Light Some adventuring tasks---such as noticing danger, hitting an enemy, and targeting certain spells---are affected by sight, so effects that obscure vision can hinder you, as explained below. # Obscured Areas An area might be Lightly or Heavily Obscured. In a Lightly Obscured area---such as an area with Dim Light, patchy fog, or moderate foliage---you have Disadvantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks that rely on sight. A Heavily Obscured area---such as an area with Darkness, heavy fog, or dense foliage---is opaque. You have the Blinded condition (see the rules glos- sary) when trying to see something there. LIGHT The presence or absence of light determines the cat- egory of illumination in an area, as defined below. Bright Light. Bright Light lets most creatures see normally. Even gloomy days provide Bright Light, as do torches, lanterns, fires, and other sources of illumination within a specific radius. Dim Light. Dim Light, also called shadows, creates a Lightly Obscured area. An area of Dim Light is usually a boundary between Bright Light and sur- rounding Darkness. The soft light of twilight and dawn also counts as Dim Light. A full moon might bathe the land in Dim Light. Darkness. Darkness creates a Heavily Obscured area. Characters face Darkness outdoors at night (even most moonlit nights), within the confines of an unlit dungeon, or in an area of magical Darkness. # Special Senses Some creatures have special senses that help them perceive things in certain situations. The rules glos- sary defines the following special senses: Blindsight Tremorsense Darkvision Truesight HIDING \_ Adventurers and monsters often hide, whether to spy on one another, sneak past a guardian, or set an ambush. The Dungeon Master decides when cir- cumstances are appropriate for hiding. When you try to hide, you take the Hide action. INTERACTING WITH OBJECTS Interacting with objects is often simple to resolve. The player tells the DM that their character is do- ing something, such as moving a lever or opening a door, and the DM describes what happens. Some- times, however, rules govern what you can do with an object, as detailed in the following sections. MARCHING ORDER What Is AN OBJECT?; For the purpose of the rules, an object is a discrete, The adventurers should establish a marching inanimate item like a window, door, sword, book, order while they travel, whether indoors or out: table, chair, or stone. It isn't a building or a vehicle, doors. A marching order makes it easier to de- which are composed of many objects. termine which characters are affected by traps, which ones can spot hidden enemies, and which ones are the closest to those enemies if a fight breaks out. You can change your marching order outside combat and record the order any way you like: write it down, for example, or arrange minia- TimE-LIMITED OBJECT INTERACTIONS When time is short, such as in combat, interactions with objects are limited: one free interaction per turn. That interaction must occur during a crea- ture's movement or action. Any additional inter- thres to-show Tt: actions require the Utilize action, as explained in im = "Combat" later in this chapter. TRAVEL PAGE FINDING HIDDEN OBJECTS While traveling outside combat, a group can move When your character searches for hidden things, at a Fast, Normal, or Slow pace, as shown on the such as a secret door or a trap, the DM typically Travel Pace table. The table states how far the asks you to make a Wisdom (Perception) check, party can move in a period of time; if riding horses provided you describe the character searching in or other mounts, the group can move twice that the hidden object's vicinity. On a success, you find distance for 1 hour, after which the mounts need the object, other important details, or both. a Short or Long Rest before they can move at that If you describe your character searching nowhere increased pace again (see chapter 6 for a selection near a hidden object, a Wisdom (Perception) check of mounts for sale). The Dungeon Master's Guide has rules that affect which pace you can choose in cer- won't reveal the object, no matter the check's total. tain types of terrain. # Carrying Objects You can usually carry your gear and treasure with- out worrying about the weight of those objects. TRAVEL PACE Distance Traveled Per... If you try to haul an unusually heavy object or a massive number of lighter objects, the DM might re- Pate Minute Hour Day quire you to abide by the rules for carrying capacity Fast 400 feet 4 miles 30 miles in the rules glossary. Normal 300 feet 3 miles 24 miles Slow 200 feet 2 miles 18 miles BREAKING OBJECTS Asan action, you can automatically break or oth- Each travel pace has a game effect, as defined below. erwise destroy a fragile, nonmagical object, such as Fast. Traveling at a Fast pace imposes Disadvan- a glass container or a piece of paper. If you try to tage on a traveler's Wisdom (Perception or Sur- damage something more resilient, the DM might use vival) and Dexterity (Stealth) checks. the rules on breaking objects in the rules glossary. Normal. Traveling at a Normal pace imposes Dis- HAzarps advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. Slow. Traveling at a Slow pace grants Advantage on Wisdom (Perception or Survival) checks. Monsters are the main perils characters face, but other dangers await. The rules glossary defines the following hazards: VEHICLES 7: Travelers in wagons, carriages, or other land vehi- Burnin, Fallin, Suffocati: Beek; ig 8 tion cles choose a pace as normal. Characters in a water- borne vessel are limited to the speed of the vessel, TRAVEL and they don't choose a travel pace. Depending on = the vessel and the size of the crew, ships might be During an adventure, the characters might travel able to travel for up to 24 hours per day. Chapter 6 long distances on trips that could take hours or includes vehicles for sale. days. The DM can summarize this travel without calculating exact distances or travel times, or the EXPLORATION EXAMPLE Dehydration Malnutrition DM might have you use the travel pace. "\| IF yo! a dito ee how fast Sica Ayaan This scene finds the player characters investigating prerycecandaatiers cee the movementrulesin a mysterious and potentially dangerous location. "Combat" later in this chapter. They're moving through the environment and inter- acting with things they find there. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME The characters are exploring Castle Ravenloft, and the DM describes the room the characters have entered. Jared (as DM): A blazing hearth fire fills this room with warm light. Firelight glints off a poker beside the fireplace, and the walls are lined with ancient books. A huge painting hangs above the mantel- piece in a gilded frame. The firelight illuminates the portrait---an exact likeness of lreena Kolyana. Phillip (as Gareth): How old does the painting look? Maeve (as Mirabella): I'm going to check the books! Jared: OK, I'll get to those in a second. Russell and Amy, what are your characters doing? Russell (as Shreeve): \| stand near the door, sword drawn, ready for danger. This place is creepy! Amy (as Auro): \| go near the fireplace. A warm fire sounds nice. But I'm also alert for danger. | Jared: Got it. OK, Phillip, please make an Intelligence (History) check as Gareth looks at the painting.? Phillip: \| don't have proficiency in History, but here goes. \| got---oh! A 20! For a total of... 20. Jared: Two things leap out at Gareth about the paint- ing. First, the woman's clothes look old-fashioned. Second, the paint is flaking in places, and the whole thing is covered by a thin layer of soot. You'd say this painting is a few centuries old. Phillip: So maybe an ancestor of Ireena's? Unless she's already a vampire and this "bitten by Strahd" thing is a ruse. Jared: Who knows? Now, Mirabella's looking at the books? Maeve: Yeah, \| pull one off the shelf at random. FY 1d Everyone Is Accounted For. Exploration is ' open-ended; the players don't take turns moving around the dungeon the way they do in combat. But the DM frequently checks in to make sure it's clear where everyone is and what they're doing. \_f og Teamwork Matters. The player characters are working toward a common goal. They move together through the dungeon and cooperate to overcome its challenges. When the characters enter the room, they explore different parts of the room. When Auro finds a secret door behind the fireplace later in the example, they come together again to exam- ine it, and Gareth figures out how to bypass the fire. It might seem like Russell's charac- ter wasn't doing much, but Shreeve was pro- ) \_ tecting the group by guarding the door. a Worth Rolling with or without Proficiency. You usually have a chance of success on an ability check even if you don't have pro- ficiency in a relevant skill. In the example, Phillip gets a 20 without proficiency. The d20 brings many surprises to the game---sur- prises that the DM then interprets. Jared: It's a book written in Common called On the Habitations of the Divine in the Celestial and Infer- nal Realms. Russell: Did you just make that up? Jared: I'll never tell. As you flip through the book, you notice it's very academic, almost impenetrable. Maeve: OK, \| put that one back and pull out another. Jared: Are Shreeve and Auro doing anything else? \| Amy: \| grab the poker and poke at logs in the fire. Jared: As soon as you lift the poker, you hear a grind- 9 ing sound, and the back of the fireplace slides to \| the side, revealing a room behind it! Amy: "Uh, folks? \| found something!" Can \| see anything in the room beyond? Jared: Past the flames and smoke, you see a glim- mering pile of coins heaped near a chest. \| Amy: Anybody have a quick way to put out a fire? Phillip: And you laughed at me for preparing Create or Destroy Water! \| clutch my Holy Symbol and © «cast the spell, drenching the fireplace. Jared: What does the spell's description say? Phillip: It causes 10 gallons of water to rain down in a 30-foot Cube, extinguishing flames there. Jared: Great! That puts out the fire. Without the light from the hearth, you're back to the magic glow of Shreeve's sword, which casts your shadows into the room beyond. But you can see, through clouds of lingering smoke, a closed chest on the floor, surrounded by piles of coins. There are two © torch sconces on the far wall---one holding an unlit torch with an intricate metal base, the other empty. A skeleton in broken plate armor is lying against that wall, with one hand at its throat and the other holding the matching torch from the empty sconce. Amy: \| check out the chest! Jared: And the rest of you? Phillip: Gareth enters and looks at the skeleton. Maeve: \| keep watch on this side of the fireplace. Russell: I'm still back by the first door. Jared: Amy, the chest seems expertly made, with elegant fittings and clawed feet. Any: a\] try to Coen Is it locked? bc ee Gareth to make Con- and Gai i. o } CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME wy The X \[\| Finding Hidden Objects. Adventure environ- ments are full of secrets: traps, concealed doors, loose floorboards, and hidden trea- sures. Characters often use Wisdom checks to find things---see the Search action in the rules glossary---but sometimes they stum- i ble on them accidentally, as Auro did here. # N 2 G eS \[\| Casting Spells. Many characters have the \] ability to cast spells, which have a huge vari- ety of effects. Some spells are mostly useful in combat, by dealing damage or imposing conditions. Other spells have utility in ex- ploration. If you're playing a spellcaster, look for a mix of combat-effective and utilitarian spells to help deal with varied challenges. iN J S Know Your Spells! Have your Player's Hand- book open to the description of a spell before you cast it. Don't expect the DM to know how your spell works, and be ready to answer any questions about it. X Le Y & \| Vision and Light. The DM determines what the adventurers can perceive, which means being aware of light sources---like the leap- ing flames in the fireplace and Shreeve's glowing sword---as well as obscuring factors like smoke and fog. See "Vision and Light" earlier in this chapter for more information. Y OF =\| Saving Throws. A saving throw is used to see \_\_\|\|\| whether a creature avoids or resists some- thing. When the chest releases toxic gas, Phillip's and Amy's characters make Con- stitution saving throws. Constitution is one of the six abilities that measure creatures' capabilities, and it has to do with health and stamina. When they fail their saves, the gas \| causes them to have the Paralyzed condi- tion. See "Conditions" later in this chapter i for more information. COMBAT Adventurers encounter many dangerous monsters and nefarious villains. In those moments, combat often breaks out. # The Order Of Combat A typical combat encounter is a clash between two sides: a flurry of weapon swings, feints, parries, footwork, and spellcasting. The game organizes combat into a cycle of rounds and turns. A round represents about 6 seconds in the game world. During a round, each participant in a battle takes a turn. The order of turns is determined at the begin- ning of combat when everyone rolls Initiative. Once everyone has taken a turn, the fight continues to the next round if neither side is defeated. ComBAT STEP BY STEP Combat unfolds in these steps: 1: Establish Positions. The Dungeon Master deter- mines where all the characters and monsters are located. Given the adventurers' marching order or their stated positions in the room or other lo- cation, the DM figures out where the adversaries are---how far away and in what direction. 2: Roll Initiative. Everyone involved in the combat encounter rolls Initiative, determining the order of combatants' turns. 3: Take Turns. Each participant in the battle takes aturn in Initiative order. When everyone in- volved in the combat has had a turn, the round ends. Repeat this step until the fighting stops. INITIATIVE Initiative determines the order of turns during combat. When combat starts, every participant rolls Initiative; they make a Dexterity check that determines their place in the Initiative order. The DM rolls for monsters. For a group of identical crea- tures, the DM makes a single roll, so each member of the group has the same Initiative. Surprise. If a combatant is surprised by combat starting, that combatant has Disadvantage on their Initiative roll. For example, if an ambusher starts combat while hidden from a foe who is unaware that combat is starting, that foe is surprised. Initiative Order. A combatant's check total is called their Initiative count, or Initiative for short. The DM ranks the combatants, from highest to lowest Initiative. This is the order in which they act during each round. The Initiative order remains the same from round to round. Ties. If a tie occurs, the DM decides the order among tied monsters, and the players decide the order among tied characters. The DM decides the order if the tie is between a monster and a player character. YouR TURN On your turn, you can move a distance up to your Speed and take one action. You decide whether to move first or take your action first. The main actions you can take are listed in "Ac- tions" earlier in this chapter. A character's features and a monster's stat block also provide action op- tions. "Movement and Position" later in this chapter gives the rules for movement. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME 23 94 CREATURES OCCUPY SPACES OF VARYING sizes. Tuis DispLacer Beast occupies # A 10-by-10-foot Space, While The Adventurers Occupy 5-by-5-foot Spaces Communicating. You can communicate however you are able---through brief utterances and ges- tures---as you take your turn. Doing so uses neither your action nor your move. Extended communication, such as a detailed ex- planation of something or an attempt to persuade a foe, requires an action. The Influence action is the main way you try to influence a monster. Interacting with Things. You can interact with one object or feature of the environment for free, during either your move or action. For example, you could open a door during your move as you stride toward a foe. If you want to interact with a second object, you need to take the Utilize action. Some magic items and other special objects always require an action to use, as stated in their descriptions. The DM might require you to use an action for any of these activities when it needs special care or when it presents an unusual obstacle. For instance, the DM might require you to take the Utilize action to open a stuck door or turn a crank to lower a drawbridge. Doing Nothing on Your Turn. You can forgo mov- ing, taking an action, or doing anything at all on your turn. If you can't decide what to do, consider taking the defensive Dodge action or the Ready ac- tion to delay acting. CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME ENDING COMBAT Combat ends when one side or the other is defeated, which can mean the creatures are killed or knocked out or have surrendered or fled. Combat can also end when both sides agree to end it. # Movement And Position On your turn, you can move a distance equal to your Speed or less. Or you can decide not to move. Your movement can include climbing, crawling, jumping, and swimming (each explained in the rules glossary). These different modes of movement can be combined with your regular movement, or they can constitute your entire move. However you're moving with your Speed, you deduct the distance of each part of your move from it until it is used up or until you are done moving, whichever comes first. A character's Speed is determined during char- acter creation. A monster's Speed is noted in the monster's stat block. See the rules glossary for more about Speed as well as about special speeds, such as a Climb Speed, Fly Speed, or Swim Speed. DIFFICULT TERRAIN Combatants are often slowed down by Difficult Terrain. Low furniture, rubble, undergrowth, steep stairs, snow, and shallow bogs are examples of Diffi- cult Terrain. a" \_--- PLAYING ON A GRID If you play using a square grid and miniatures or other tokens, follow these rules. Squares. Each square represents 5 feet. Speed. Rather than moving foot by foot, move square by square on the grid, using your Speed in 5-foot segments. You can translate your Speed into squares by dividing it by 5. For example, a Speed of 30 feet translates into 6 squares. If you use a grid often, consider writing your Speed in squares on your character sheet. Entering a Square. To enter a square, you must have enough movement left to pay for entering. It costs 1 square of movement to enter an un- occupied square that's adjacent to your space (orthogonally or diagonally adjacent). A square of Difficult Terrain costs 2 squares to enter. Other effects might make a square cost even more. Corners. Diagonal movement can't cross the corner of a wall, a large tree, or another terrain feature that fills its space. Ranges. To determine the range on a grid between two things---whether creatures or ob- jects---count squares from a square adjacent to one of them and stop counting in the space of the other one. Count by the shortest route. --- g aaa Every foot of movement in Difficult Terrain costs 1 extra foot, even if multiple things in a space count as Difficult Terrain. BREAKING UP YouR MOVE You can break up your move, using some of its movement before and after any action, Bonus Ac- tion, or Reaction you take on the same turn. For ex- ample, if you have a Speed of 30 feet, you could go 10 feet, take an action, and then go 20 feet. # Dropping Prone On your turn, you can give yourself the Prone condition (see the rules glossary) without using an action or any of your Speed, but you can't do so if your Speed is 0. CREATURE SIZE A creature belongs to a size category, which deter- mines the width of the square space the creature occupies on a map, as shown on the Creature Size and Space table. That table lists the sizes from smallest (Tiny) to largest (Gargantuan). A creature's space is the area that it effectively controls in com- bat and the area it needs to fight effectively. A character's size is determined by species, and a monster's size is specified in the monster's stat block. # Creature Size And Space Size Space (Feet) Space (Squares) Tiny 22 by 22 feet 4 per square Small 5 by 5 feet 1 square Medium 5 by 5 feet 1 square Large 10 by 10 feet 4 squares (2 by 2) Huge 1S by 15 feet 20 by 20 feet 9 squares (3 by 3) Gargantuan 16 squares (4 by 4) MOVING AROUND OTHER CREATURES During your move, you can pass through the space of an ally, a creature that has the Incapacitated con- dition (see the rules glossary), a Tiny creature, ora creature that is two sizes larger or smaller than you. Another creature's space is Difficult Terrain for you unless that creature is Tiny or your ally. You can't willingly end a move in a space occupied by another creature. If you somehow end a turn in a space with another creature, you have the Prone condition (see the rules glossary) unless you are Tiny or are of a larger size than the other creature. # Making An Attack When you take the Attack action, you make an attack. Some other actions, Bonus Actions, and Re- actions also let you make an attack. Whether you strike with a Melee weapon, fire a Ranged weapon, or make an attack roll as part of a spell, an attack has the following structure: 1: Choose a Target. Pick a target within your at- tack's range: a creature, an object, or a location. 2: Determine Modifiers. The DM determines whether the target has Cover (see the next sec- tion) and whether you have Advantage or Disadvantage against the target. In addition, spells, special abilities, and other effects can apply pen- alties or bonuses to your attack roll. 3: Resolve the Attack. Make the attack roll, as detailed earlier in this chapter. On a hit, you roll damage unless the particular attack has rules that specify otherwise. Some attacks cause spe- cial effects in addition to or instead of damage. COVER Walls, trees, creatures, and other obstacles can provide cover, making a target more difficult to harm. As detailed in the Cover table, there are three degrees of cover, each of which gives a different benefit to a target. A target can benefit from cover only when an at- tack or other effect originates on the opposite side of the cover. If a target is behind multiple sources of 26 x UNSEEN ATTACKERS AND TARGETS When you make an attack roll against a target you can't see, you have Disadvantage on the roll. This is true whether you're guessing the target's loca- tion or targeting a creature you can hear but not see. If the target isn't in the location you targeted, you miss. When a creature can't see you, you have Advan- tage on attack rolls against it. If you are hidden when you make an attack roll, you give away your location when the attack hits or misses. cover, only the most protective degree of cover ap- plies; the degrees aren't added together. For exam- ple, if a target is behind a creature that gives Half Cover and a tree trunk that gives Three-Quarters Cover, the target has Three-Quarters Cover. Cover Degree Benefit to Target Half +2 bonus to AC and Dexterity saving throws Three- +5 bonus to AC Quarters and Dexterity at least three-quarters saving throws of the target Total Can't be targeted An object that covers directly the whole target Offered By... Another creature or an object that covers at least half of the target An object that covers