# ASN ee YS ait LFLP LIT \| CCC a eS a, AS WY # Jd Ccc ST cata Bea N IS )) or Lantern. That duration doesn't need to be con- secutive; you can extinguish the burning Oil (as \| a Utilize action) and rekindle it again until it has yi burned for a total of 6 hours. { PAPER (2 SP); One sheet of Paper can hold about 250 handwritten words. PARCHMENT (1 SP) One sheet of Parchment can hold about 250 hand- written words. PERFUME (5 GP) Perfume comes in a 4-ounce vial. For 1 hour after applying Perfume to yourself, you have Advantage on Charisma (Persuasion) checks made to influence an Indifferent Humanoid within 5 feet of yourself. Porson, Basic (100 GP) As a Bonus Action, you can use a vial of Basic Poi- son to coat one weapon or up to three pieces of am- munition. A creature that takes Piercing or Slashing damage from the poisoned weapon or ammunition takes an extra 1d4 Poison damage. Once applied, the poison retains potency for 1 minute or until its dam- ' age is dealt, whichever comes first. q # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT { 207 Ls Pore (5 CP) A Pole is 10 feet long. You can use it to touch something up to 10 feet away. If you must make a Strength (Athletics) check as part of a High or Long Jump, you can use the Pole to vault, giving yourself Advantage on the check. Por, Iron (2 GP) An Iron Pot holds up to 1 gallon. POTION OF HEALING (50 GP) This potion is a magic item. As a Bonus Action, you can drink it or administer it to another creature within 5 feet of yourself. The creature that drinks the magical red fluid in this vial regains 2d4 + 2 Hit Points. Poucu (5 SP) A Pouch holds up to 6 pounds within one-fifth of a cubic foot. PriEsT's Pack (33 GP) A Priest's Pack contains the following items: Back- pack, Blanket, Holy Water, Lamp, 7 days of Rations, Robe, and Tinderbox. Quiver (1 GP) A Quiver holds up to 20 Arrows. Ram, PorTaBLe (4 GP) You can use a Portable Ram to break down doors. When doing so, you gain a +4 bonus to the Strength check. One other character can help you use the ram, giving you Advantage on this check. Rations (5 SP) Rations consist of travel-ready food, including jerky, dried fruit, hardtack, and nuts. See "Malnutrition" in the rules glossary for the risks of not eating. Rose (1 GP) A Robe has vocational or ceremonial significance. Some events and locations admit only people wear- ing a Robe bearing certain colors or symbols. Rope (1 GP) As a Utilize action, you can tie a knot with Rope if you succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. The Rope can be burst with a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check. You can bind an unwilling creature with the Rope only if the creature has the Grappled, Incapacitated, or Restrained condition. If the creature's legs are bound, the creature has the Restrained condition until it escapes. Escaping the Rope requires the creature to make a successful DC 15 Dexterity (Ac- robatics) check as an action. Sack (1 CP) A Sack holds up to 30 pounds within 1 cubic foot. ScHo.ar's Pack (40 GP) A Scholar's Pack contains the following items: Back- pack, Book, Ink, Ink Pen, Lamp, 10 flasks of Oil, 10 sheets of Parchment, and Tinderbox. SHOVEL (2 GP) Working for 1 hour, you can use a Shovel to dig a hole that is 5 feet on each side in soil or similar material. SIGNAL WHISTLE (5 CP) When blown as a Utilize action, a Signal Whistle produces a sound that can be heard up to 600 feet away. SPELL SCROLL (CANTRIP, 30 GP; Level, 50 GP) A Spell Scroll (Cantrip) or Spell Scroll (Level 1) is a magic item that bears the words of a cantrip or level 1 spell, respectively, determined by the scroll's cre- ator. If the spell is on your class's spell list, you can read the scroll and cast the spell using its normal casting time and without providing any Material components. If the spell requires a saving throw or an attack roll, the spell save DC is 13, and the attack bonus is +5. The scroll disintegrates when the casting is completed. Spikes, \[RON (1 GP) Iron Spikes come in bundles of teri. As a Utilize action, you can use a blunt object, such as a Light Hammer, to hammer a spike into wood, earth, ora similar material. You can do so to ja: a door shut or to then tie a Rope or Chain to the Spite. i SpycLass (1,000 GP) Objects viewed through a Spyglass are magnified to twice their size. Srrinc (1 SP) String is 10 feet long. You can tie a knot init asa Utilize action. Tent (2 GP) A Tent sleeps up to two Small or Medium creatures. TINDERBOX (5 SP) A Tinderbox is a small container holding flint, fire steel, and tinder (usually dry cloth soaked in light oil) used to kindle a fire. Using it to light a Candle, Lamp, Lantern, or Torch---or anything else with exposed fuel---takes a Bonus Action. Lighting any other fire takes 1 minute. Torcu (1 CP) A Torch burns for 1 hour, casting Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. When you take the Attack action, you can attack with the Torch, using it as a Simple Melee weapon. On a hit, the target takes 1 Fire damage. Via (1 GP) A Vial holds up to 4 ounces. WATERSKIN (2 SP) A Waterskin holds up to 4 pints. If you don't drink sufficient water, you risk dehydration (see the rules glossary). # Mounts And Vehicles Amount can help you move more quickly through the wilderness, but its primary purpose is to carry gear that would otherwise slow you down. The Mounts and Other Animals table shows each ani- mal's carrying capacity. See appendix B for the ani- mals' stat blocks. MOUNTS AND CaRGo An animal pulling a carriage, cart, chariot, sled, or wagon can move weight up to five times its base carrying capacity, including the weight of the ve- hicle. If multiple animals pull the same vehicle, add their carrying capacities together, BARDING Barding is armor designed for a mount. Any type of armor on the Armor table in this chapter can be purchased as barding. The cost is four times the normal cost, and it weighs twice as much. SADDLES A saddle comes with a bit, a bridle, reins, and any other equipment needed to use the saddle. A Mili- tary Saddle gives Advantage on any ability check you make to remain mounted. An Exotic Saddle is required for riding an aquatic or a flying mount. # Mounts And Other Animals Item Carrying Capacity Cost Camel 450 Ib. 50 GP Elephant 1,320 Ib. 200 GP Horse, Draft 540 Ib. 50 GP Horse, Riding 480 Ib. 75 GP Mastiff 195 Ib. 25 GP Mule 420 \|b. 8 GP Pony 225 \|b. 30 GP Warhorse 540 Ib. 400 GP 6 \| EQUIPMENT / Tack, HARNESS, AND DRAWN VEHICLES Item Weight Cost Carriage 600 Ib. 100 GP Cart 200 Ib. 15 GP Chariot 100 Ib. 250 GP Feed per day 10 Ib. 5CP Saddle Exotic 40 Ib. 60 GP Military 30 Ib. 20 GP Riding 25 Ib. 10 GP Sled 300 Ib. 20 GP Stabling per day --- 5'SP: 400 Ib. 35 GP Wagon # Large Vehicles The Airborne and Waterborne Vehicles table pro- vides statistics for various types of large vehicles. The following notes apply. SPEED A ship sailing against a strong wind moves at half speed. In a dead calm (no wind), waterborne ships can't move under sail and must be rowed. Keelboats and Rowboats are used on lakes and rivers. If going downstream, add the speed of the current (typically 3 miles per hour) to the speed of the vehicle. These vehicles can't be rowed against any significant cur- rent, but they can be pulled upstream by draft animals on the shores. A Rowboat can be carried and weighs 100 pounds. CREW A ship larger than a Keelboat or Rowboat needs a crew of skilled hirelings (see "Services" later in this chapter) to function. The minimum number of skilled hirelings needed to crew a ship depends on the type of ship, as shown in the table. # Airborne And Waterborne Vehicles PASSENGERS The table lists the number of Small and Medium passengers the ship can accommodate using ham- mocks. A ship outfitted with private accommodations can carry one-fifth as many passengers. A passenger usually pays 5 SP per day fora hammock, but prices can vary from ship to ship. A small pri- vate cabin usually costs 2 GP per day. DAMAGE THRESHOLD If a vehicle has a damage threshold (see the rules glossary), it's noted in the table. Suip REPAIR Repairs to a damaged ship can be made while the vessel is berthed. Repairing 1 Hit Point of damage requires 1 day and costs 20 GP for materials and la- bor. If the repairs are made in a location where supplies and skilled labor are abundant, such as a city shipyard, the repair time and cost are halved. SERVICES This section outlines services and other expenses that adventurers might spend money on. # Lifestyle Expenses Lifestyle expenses summarize the cost of living ina fantasy world. They cover lodging, food, equipment maintenance, and other necessities. At the start of each week or month (DM's choice), choose a lifestyle below---Wretched, Squalid, Poor, Modest, Comfortable, Wealthy, or Aristocratic---and pay the price to sustain that lifestyle. Lifestyles have no inherent consequences, but the DM might take them into account when determin- ing risks or how others perceive your character. WRETCHED (FREE) You survive via chance and charity. You're often exposed to natural dangers as a result of sleeping outside, Ship Speed Crew Passengers Cargo(Tons) AC HP = Damage Threshold Cost Airship 8mph 10 20 1 13 300 --- 40,000 GP Galley 4mph 80 \_ 150 15 500 20 30,000 GP Keelboat Tmph 1 6 1/2 15 100 10 3,000 GP Longship 3mph 40 150 10 15 300 15 10,000 GP Rowboat Ta mph \] 3 = n 50 \_ 50 GP Sailing Ship 2mph 20 20 100 15 300 15 10,000 GP Warship 2%zmph 60 60 200 15 500 # 20 25,000 Gp # A Witard Ano Her Familiar Spend An Afternoon Shopping. SQUALID (1 SP PER Day) Foop, DRINK, AND LODGING = 3 You spend the bare minimum for your necessities. Item Cost Item Cost a 1) You might be exposed to unhealthy conditions and Ale (mug) ACP Meal j opportunistic criminals. q Bread (loaf) 2CP Squalid 1cP \| Poor (2 SP PER Day) Cheese (wedge) 1SP Poor 2¢P You spend frugally for your necessities. Inn Stay per Day Modest 1sP j Mopest (1 GP PER Day) Squalid 7CP Comfortable 2SP You support yourself at an average level. Poor 1SP Wealthy 3SP; COMFORTABLE (2 GP PER Day) Modest 5 SP Aristocratic 6 SP j You spend modestly for your necessities and enjoy a Comfortable 8SP Wine (bottle) } few luxuries. Wealthy 2GP Common 2SP i WEALTHY (4 GP PER Day) Aristocratic 4GP Fine 10 GP i You're accustomed to the finer things in life and i might have servants. TRAVEL: ArisTocRATic (10 GP PER Day) Drivers or crew hired to conduct passengers to / their destinations charge the rates on the Travel ta- You pay for the best and might have a staff that supDlewniusanntclisoreddivonalernense: ports your lifestyle. Others notice your wealth and might encourage you to share it, either legally or: TRAVEL otherwise.: Service Cost Foop, Drink, AND LODGING Coach ride between towns 3 CP per mile é The Food, Drink, and Lodging table gives prices for Coach ride within a city 1CP per mile: fooaen \* pre tes eens et aay Road or gate toll 1¢P t lodging and yv:«als are included in your lifestyle's --- % E commana Ship's passage 1 SP per mile slit.; CHAPTER\| EQUIPMENT / 991 a HIRELINGS Skilled hirelings include anyone hired to perform a service that involves a proficiency (including weapon, tool, or skill): a mercenary, an artisan, a scribe, or the like. The pay shown on the Hirelings table is a minimum; some expert hirelings require more pay. Untrained hirelings are hired for work that requires no particular proficiencies; they in- clude laborers and porters. HIRELINGS Service Cost Skilled hireling 2 GP per day Untrained hireling 2 SP per day Messenger 2CP per mile SPELLCASTING Most settlements contain individuals who are will- ing to cast spells in exchange for payment. If a spell has expensive components, add the cost of those components to the cost listed in the Spellcasting Services table. The higher the level of a desired spell, the harder it is to find someone to cast it. # Spellcasting Services Spell Level Availability Cost Cantrip Village, town, or city 30 GP 1 Village, town, or city 50 GP 2 Village, town, or city 200 GP 3 Town or city only 300 GP 4-5 Town or city only 2,000 GP 6-8 City only 20,000 GP 9 City only 100,000 GP Macic ITEMS Adventures hold the promise---but not a guarantee--- of finding magic items. Hundreds of magic items are detailed in the Dungeon Master's Guide, since the DM decides when you find such an item. Here's what you need to know about using magic items. IDENTIFYING A Macic ITEM Some magic items are indistinguishable from their nonmagical counterparts, while others are conspic- uously magical. Handling a magic item is enough to give you a sense that it is extraordinary, but learning a magic item's properties isn't automatic. The Identify spell is the fastest way to reveal an item's properties. Alternatively, you can focus on one magic item during a Short Rest while being in # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT physical contact with the item. At the end of the rest, you learn its properties and how to use them (but not any curse the item might bear). Sometimes a magic item carries a clue to its prop- erties. The command word to activate a ring might be etched inside the band, or a feathered design might hint that it's a Ring of Feather Falling. Wearing or experimenting with an item can also offer hints about its properties. In the specific case of Potions, a little taste is enough to tell the taster what a potion does. Other items might require more experimentation. For example, if your char- acter puts on a Ring of Swimming, the DM might say, "Your movement feels strangely fluid." Perhaps you then dive into a river to see what happens. The DM would then say you swim unexpectedly well. ATTUNEMENT Some magic items require a creature to forma bond---called Attunement---with them before the creature can use an item's magical properties. Without becoming attuned to an item that requires Attunement, you gain only its nonmagical benefits unless its description states otherwise. For example, a magic Shield that requires Attunement provides the benefits of a normal Shield if you aren't attuned to it, but none of its magical properties. # Attune During A Short Rest Attuning to an item requires you to spend a Short Rest focused on only that item while being in physi- cal contact with it (this can't be the same Short Rest used to learn the item's properties). This focus can take the form of weapon practice (for a Weapon), meditation (for a Wand), or some other appropri- ate activity. If the Short Rest is interrupted, the Attunement attempt fails. Otherwise, at the end of the Short Rest, you're attuned to the magic item and can access its full magical capabilities. No More THAN THREE ITEMS You can be attuned to no more than three magic items at a time. Any attempt to attune to a fourth item fails; you must end your Attunement to an item first. Additionally, you can't attune to more than one copy of an item. For example, you can't attune to more than one Ring of Protection at a time. # Ending Attunement Your Attunement to an item ends if you no longer satisfy the prerequisites for Attunement, if the item has been more than 100 feet away for at least 24 hours, if you die, or if another creature attunes to the item. You can also voluntarily end Attunement by spending another Short Rest focused on the item unless the item is cursed. WEARING AND # Wielding Items Wear ee Using a magic item's properties might mean wearing or wielding it. A magic item meant to be worn must be donned in the intended fashion: boots go on feet, gloves on hands, hats and helmets on a head, and rings on a finger. Magic armor must be donned, a Shield strapped to the arm, a cloak fastened about the shoulders. A weapon must be held. In most cases, a magic item that's meant to be worn can fit a creature regardless of size or build. Magic garments are made to be easily adjustable, or they magically adjust themselves to the wearer. # Multiple Items Of The Same Kind You can't wear more than one of certain magic items. You can't normally wear more than one pair of footwear, one pair of gloves or gauntlets, one pair of bracers, one suit of armor, one item of headwear, or one cloak. The DM might make exceptions. # Paired Items Items that come in pairs---such as boots, bracers, gauntlets, and gloves---impart their benefits only if both items of the pair are worn. For example, a character wearing a Boot of Striding and Springing on one foot and a Boot of Elvenkind on the other foot gains no benefit from either. # Crafting Equipment Using the rules below, characters can make non- magical items, Potions of Healing, and Spell Scrolls. # Crafting Nonmagical Items TT rT To craft a nonmagical item, you need tools, raw ma- terials, and time, each of which is detailed below. If you meet the requirements, you make the item, and you can use it or sell it at its normal price. TOOLS This chapter's "Tools" section lists which tools are required to make certain items. The DM assigns re- quired tools for items not listed there. You must use the required tool to make an item and have proficiency with that tool. Anyone who helps you must also have proficiency with it. Raw MATERIALS To make an item, you need raw materials worth half its purchase cost (round down). For example, you need 750 GP of raw materials to make Plate Ar- mor, which sells for 1,500 GP. The DM determines whether appropriate raw materials are available. TIME To determine how many days (working 8 hours a day) it takes to make an item, divide its purchase 4 cost in GP by 10 (round a fraction up to a day). For example, you need 5 days to make a Heavy Cross- bow, which sells for 50 GP. If an item requires multiple days, the days needn't be consecutive. Characters can combine their efforts to shorten the crafting time. Divide the time needed to create an item by the number of characters working on it. Normally, only one other character can assist you, but the DM might allow more assistants. # Brewing Potions Of Healing A character who has proficiency with the Herbalism Kit can create a Potion of Healing. Doing so requires using that kit and 25 GP of raw material over the course of 1 day (8 hours of work). ScRIBING SPELL SCROLLS A spellcaster can transfer a spell to a scroll and cre- ate a Spell Scroll, using the rules below. TIME AND Cost Scribing a scroll takes an amount of time and money based on the level of the spell, as shown in the Spell Scroll Costs table. For each day of inscrip- tion, you must work for 8 hours. If a scroll requires multiple days, those days needn't be consecutive. # Prerequisites For The Scribe To scribe a scroll, you must have proficiency in the Arcana skill or with Calligrapher's Tools and have the spell prepared on each day of the inscription. You must also have at hand any Material compo- nents required by the spell; if the spell consumes its Material components, they are consumed only when you complete the scroll. The scroll's spell uses your spell save DC and spell attack bonus. CANTRIPS If the scribed spell is a cantrip, the version on the scroll works as if the caster were your level. SPELL ScROLL Costs Spell Level Time Cost Cantrip 1 day 15 GP 1 1 day 25 GP 2 3 days 100 GP 3 5 days 150 GP 4 10 days 1,000 GP 5 25 days 1,500 GP 6 40 days 10,000 GP 7 50 days 12,500 GP 8 60 days 15,000 GP t) 120 days 50,000 GP # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT # Archmages Of G MorOENKAINEN, MAGIC AS THE! # Chapter 7 SPELLS = = T= # His Chapter Gives Rules For Casting: spells. It also includes descriptions of com- \_. mon spells in the worlds of DUNGEONS & DRAGONS. Those spells are used by many class features, magic items, and monsters. # Gaining Spells Before you can cast a spell, you must have the spell prepared in your mind or have access to the spell from a magic item, such as a Spell Scroll. Your fea- tures specify which spells you have access to, if any; whether you always have certain spells prepared; and whether you can change the list of spells you have prepared. # Preparing Spells If you have a list of level 1+ spells you prepare, your spellcasting feature specifies when you can change the list and the number of spells you can change, as summarized in the Spell Preparation by Class table. # Spell Preparation By Class Class Change When You... Number of Spells Bard Gain a level One Cleric Finish a Long Rest Any Druid Finish a Long Rest Any Paladin Finish a Long Rest One Ranger Finish a Long Rest One Sorcerer Gaina level One Warlock Gain a level One Wizard Finish a Long Rest Any Most spellcasting monsters don't change their lists of prepared spells, but the DM is free to alter them. # Always-prepared Spells Certain features might give you a spell that you always have prepared. If you also have a list of pre- pared spells that you can change, a spell that you always have prepared doesn't count against the number of spells on that list. ma \_ CASTING iN ARMOR You must have training with any armor you are wearing ' cast spells while wearing it. You are otherwice too hampered by tl elarmor for \_ Spelicastiny:. ee et ---*---* -- # Casting Spells Each spell description has a series of entries that provide the details needed to cast the spell. The fol- lowing sections explain each of those entries, which follow a spell's name. # Spell Level Every spell has a level from 0 to 9, which is indi- cated in a spell's description. A spell's level is an indicator of how powerful it is. Cantrips---simple spells that can be cast almost by rote---are level 0. The rules for each spellcasting class say when its members gain access to spells of certain levels. SPELL SLots Spellcasting is taxing, so a spellcaster can cast only a limited number of level 1+ spells before resting. Spell slots are the main way a spellcaster's magical potential is represented. Each spellcasting class gives its members a limited number of spell slots of certain spell levels. For example, a level 3 Wizard has four level 1 spell slots and two level 2 slots. When you cast a spell, you expend a slot of that spell's level or higher, effectively "filling" a slot with the spell. Imagine a spell slot is a groove of a certain size---small for a level 1 slot and larger for a higher-level spell. A level 1 spell fits into a slot of any size, but a level 2 spell fits only into a slot that's at least level 2. So when a level 3 Wizard casts Magic Missile, a level 1 spell, that Wizard spends one of four level 1 slots and has three remaining. Finishing a Long Rest restores any expended spell slots. # Casting Without Slots There are several ways to cast a spell without expending a spell slot: Cantrips. A cantrip is cast without a spell slot. Rituals. Certain spells have the Ritual tag in the Casting Time entry. Such a spell can be cast fol- lowing the normal rules for spellcasting, or it can be cast as a Ritual. The Ritual version of a spell takes 10 minutes longer to cast than normal, but it doesn't expend a spell slot. To cast a spell as a Rit- ual, a spellcaster must have it prepared. Special Abilities. Some characters and monsters have special abilities that allow them to cast spe- cific spells without a spell slot. This casting is usu- ally limited in another way, such as being able to cast the spell a limited number of times per day. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS oe ee Magic Items. Spell Scrolls and some other magic items contain spells that can be cast without a spell slot. The description of such an item specifies how many times a spell can be cast from it. Usinc A HIGHER-LEVEL SPELL SLOT When a spellcaster casts a spell using a slot that is of a higher level than the spell, the spell takes on the higher level for that casting. For instance, ifa Wizard casts Magic Missile using a level 2 slot, that Magic Missile is level 2. Effectively, the spell expands to fill the slot it is put into. Some spells, such as Magic Missile and Cure Wounds, have more powerful effects when cast at a higher level, as detailed in a spell's description. SCHOOL OF MaGICc Each spell belongs to a school of magic. The schools are listed in the Schools of Magic table. These cate- gories help describe spells but have no rules of their own, although some other rules refer to them. # Schools Of Magic School Typical Effects Abjuration Prevents or reverses harmful effects Conjuration \_ Transports creatures or objects Divination Reveals information Enchantment Influences minds Evocation Channels energy to create effects that are often destructive Illusion Deceives the mind or senses Necromancy Manipulates life and death Transmutation Transforms creatures or objects Crass SPELL Lists If a spell is on a class's spell list, the class's name appears in parentheses after the spell's school of magic. Some features add a spell to a character's spell list even if the character isn't a member of a class in the parentheses. # Casting Time Most spells require the Magic action to cast, but some spells require a Bonus Action, a Reaction, or 1 minute or more. A spell's Casting Time entry speci- fies which of those is required. ONE SPELL WITH A SPELL SLOT PER TURN Ona turn, you can expend only one spell slot to cast a spell. This rule means you can't, for example, cast a spell with a spell slot using the Magic action and another one using a Bonus Action on the same turn. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS REACTION AND BONUS ACTION 'P's... GERS A spell that has a casting time of a Reaction is cast in response to a trigger that is defined in the spell's Casting Time entry. Some spells that have a casting time of a Bonus Action are also cast in response to a trigger defined in the spell. # Longer Casting Times Certain spells---including a spell cast as a Ritual--- require more time to cast: minutes or even hours. While you cast a spell with a casting time of 1 minute or more, you must take the Magic action on each of your turns, and you must maintain Con- centration (see the rules glossary) while you do so. If your Concentration is broken, the spell fails, but you don't expend a spell slot. To cast the spell again, you must start over. RANGE A spell's range indicates how far from the spell- caster the spell's effect can originate, and the spell's description specifies which part of the effect is lim- ited by the range. A range usually takes one of the following forms: Distance. The range is expressed in feet. Touch. The spell's effect originates on something the spellcaster must touch, as defined in the spell. Self. The spell is cast on the spellcaster or emanates from them, as specified in the spell. If a spell has movable effects, they aren't restricted by its range unless the spell's description says otherwise. COMPONENTS A spell's components are physical requirements the spellcaster must meet to cast the spell. Each spell's description indicates whether it requires Verbal (V), Somatic (S), or Material (M) components. If the spellcaster can't provide one or more of a spell's components, the spellcaster can't cast the spell. VERBAL (V) A Verbal component is the chanting of esoteric words that sound like nonsense to the uninitiated. The words must be uttered in a normal speaking voice. The words themselves aren't the source of the spell's power; rather, the particular combination of sounds, with specific pitch and resonance, sets the threads of magic in motion. Thus, a creature who is gagged or in an area of magical silence can't cast a spell with a Verbal component. Somaric (S) A Somatic component is a forceful gesticulation or an intricate set of gestures. A spellcaster must use at least one of their hands to perform these movements, MATERIAL (M) A Material component is a particular material used in a spell's casting, as specified in parentheses in the Components entry. These materials aren't consumed by the spell unless the spell's description states otherwise. The spellcaster must have a hand free to access them, but it can be the same hand used to perform Somatic components, if any. If a spell doesn't consume its materials and doesn't specify a cost for them, a spellcaster can use a Com- ponent Pouch (see chapter 6) instead of providing the materials specified in the spell, or the spellcaster can substitute a Spellcasting Focus if the caster has a feature that allows that substitution. To use a Component Pouch, you must have a hand free to reach into it, and to use a Spellcasting Focus, you must hold it unless its description says otherwise (see chapter 6 for descriptions). am \_ # Creating Verbal Components If you'd like to say a spell's Verbal component, you may make up the words. However you make them, the goal is to create something that's easy to say and that doesn't mean anything in the real world. Consider this method: take the name of the spell, keep only one instance of each of its letters, and rearrange the remaining letters into words. For example, remove the second \| from Fireball and rearrange the remaining letters to create Ber Fila or Fel Bira. = dl AN Ansimag WIZARD USES A CRYSTAL # Material Component To Focus The macic oF Cone oF Coro. DURATION A spell's duration is the length of time the spell per- sists after it is cast. A duration typically takes one of the following forms: Concentration. A duration that requires Concen- tration follows the Concentration rules (see the rules glossary). Instantaneous. An instantaneous duration means the spell's magic appears only for a moment and then disappears. Time Span. A duration that provides a time span specifies how long the spell lasts in rounds, min- utes, hours, or the like. For example, a Duration entry might say "1 minute," meaning the spell ends after 1 minute has passed. While a time-span spell that you cast is ongoing, you can dismiss it (no ac- tion required) if you don't have the Incapacitated condition. EFFECTS The effects of a spell are detailed after its duration entry. Those details present exactly what the spell does, which ignores mundane physical laws; any outcomes beyond those effects are under the DM's purview. Whatever the effects, they typically deal with targets, saving throws, attack rolls, or all three, each of which is detailed below. TARGETS A typical spell requires the caster to pick one or more targets to be affected by the spell's magic. A spell's description says whether the spell targets creatures, objects, or something else. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS # 3 Point Of Origin # Emanation And Sphere A Clear Path to the Target. To target something with a spell, a caster must have a clear path to it, so it can't be behind Total Cover. Targeting Yourself. If a spell targets a creature of your choice, you can choose yourself unless the creature must be Hostile or specifically a creature other than you. Areas of Effect. Some spells, such as Thunderwave, cover an area called an area of effect, which is de- fined in the rules glossary. The area determines what the spell targets. The description of a spell specifies whether it has an area of effect, which is typically one of these shapes: Cone, Cube, Cylinder, Emanation, Line, or Sphere. Awareness of Being Targeted. Unless a spell has a perceptible effect, a creature doesn't know it was targeted by the spell. An effect like lightning is ob- vious, but a more subtle effect, such as an attempt to read thoughts, goes unnoticed unless a spell's description says otherwise. Invalid Targets. If you cast a spell on someone or something that can't be affected by it, nothing happens to that target, but if you used a spell slot to cast the spell, the slot is still expended. If the spell normally has no effect on a target that succeeds on a saving throw, the invalid target ap- pears to have succeeded on its saving throw, even though it didn't attempt one (giving no hint that the creature is an invalid target). Otherwise, you per- ceive that the spell did nothing to the target. Savinc THROWS Many spells specify that a target makes a saving throw to avoid some or all of a spell's effects. The spell specifies the ability that the target uses for # CHAPTER \| SPELLS the save and what happens on a success or failure. Here's how to calculate the DC for your spells: Spell save DC = 8 + your spellcasting ability modifier + your Proficiency Bonus ATTACK ROLLS Some spells require the caster to make an attack roll to determine whether the spell hits a target. Here's how to calculate the attack modifier for your spells: Spell attack modifier = your spellcasting ability modifier + your Proficiency Bonus # Combining Spell Effects The effects of different spells add together while their durations overlap. In contrast, the effects of the same spell cast multiple times don't combine. Instead, the most potent effect---such as the high- est bonus---from those castings applies while their durations overlap. The most recent effect applies if the castings are equally potent and their durations overlap. For example, if two Clerics cast Bless on the same target, that target gains the spell's benefit only once; the target doesn't receive two bonus dice. But if the durations of the spells overlap, the effect con- tinues until the duration of the second Bless ends. at --- # Identifying An Ongoing Spell You can try to identify a non-instantaneous spell by its observable effects if its duration is ongoing. To identify it, you must take the Study action and succeed on a DC 15 Intelligenvs 'Arcana) check. eer oe \_ = --- ae # Spell Descriptions The spells are presented in alphabetical order. Acip SPLASH Evocation Cantrip (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: Vv, S Duration: Instantaneous You create an acidic bubble at a point within range, where it explodes in a 5-foot-radius Sphere. Each creature in that Sphere must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 1d6 Acid damage. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d6 when you reach levels 5 (2d6), 11 (3d6), and 17 (446). AID Level 2 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a strip of white cloth) Duration: 8 hours Choose up to three creatures within range. Each target's Hit Point maximum and current Hit Points increase by 5 for the duration. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Each target's Hit Points increase by 5 for each spell slot level above 2. ALARM Level 1 Abjuration (Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a bell and silver wire) Duration: 8 hours You set an alarm against intrusion. Choose a door, a window, or an area within range that is no larger than a 20-foot Cube. Until the spell ends, an alarm alerts you whenever a creature touches or enters the warded area. When you cast the spell, you can designate creatures that won't set off the alarm. You also choose whether the alarm is audible or mental: Audible Alarm. The alarm produces the sound of a handbell for 10 seconds within 60 feet of the warded area. Mental Alarm. You are alerted by a mental ping if you are within 1 mile of the warded area. This ping awakens you if you're asleep. # Alter Self Level 2 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You alter your physical form. Choose one of the following options. Its effects last for the duration, during which you can take a Magic action to replace the option you chose with a different one. Aquatic Adaptation. You sprout gills and grow webs between your fingers. You can breathe under- water and gain a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. Change Appearance. You alter your appearance. You decide what you look like, including your height, weight, facial features, sound of your voice, hair length, coloration, and other distinguishing characteristics. You can make yourself appear as a member of another species, though none of your statistics change. You can't appear as a creature of a different size, and your basic shape stays the same; if you're bipedal, you can't use this spell to become quadrupedal, for instance. For the duration, you can take a Magic action to change your appearance in this way again. Natural Weapons. You grow claws (Slashing), fangs (Piercing), horns (Piercing), or hooves (Blud- geoning). When you use your Unarmed Strike to deal damage with that new growth, it deals 1d6 damage of the type in parentheses instead of deal- ing the normal damage for your Unarmed Strike, and you use your spellcasting ability modifier for the attack and damage rolls rather than using Strength. # Animal Friendship Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a morsel of food) Duration: 24 hours Target a Beast that you can see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. If you or one of your allies deals damage to the target, the spells ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional Beast for each spell slot level above 1. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS lt te ae 239 \| \| ANIMAL MESSENGER Aj Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Ranger) i Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a morsel of food) Duration: 24 hours A Tiny Beast of your choice that you can see within \| range must succeed on a Charisma saving throw, or it attempts to deliver a message for you (if the tar- \| get's Challenge Rating isn't 0, it automatically suc- ceeds). You specify a location you have visited and a recipient who matches a general description, such as: "a person dressed in the uniform of the town guard" or "a red-haired dwarf wearing a pointed hat." You i also communicate a message of up to twenty-five words. The Beast travels for the duration toward the specified location, covering about 25 miles per 24 hours or 50 miles if the Beast can fly. When the Beast arrives, it delivers your message to the creature that you described, mimicking your communication. If the Beast doesn't reach its desti- nation before the spell ends, the message is lost, and the Beast returns to where you cast the spell. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The spell's dura- tion increases by 48 hours for each spell slot level above 2. ANIMAL SHAPES Level 8 Transmutation (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: 24 hours Choose any number of willing creatures that you can see within range. Each target shape-shifts into a Large or smaller Beast of your choice that has a Challenge Rating of 4 or lower. You can choose a different form for each target. On later turns, you can take a Magic action to transform the targets again. A target's game statistics are replaced by the chosen Beast's statistics, but the target retains its creature type; Hit Points; Hit Point Dice; alignment; ability to communicate; and Intelligence, Wisdom, i and Charisma scores. The target's actions are lim- '\| ited by the Beast form's anatomy, and it can't cast spells. The target's equipment melds into the new form, and the target can't use any of that equipment 3 while in that form. The target gains a number of Temporary Hit: Points equal to the Beast form's Hit Points. The = transformation lasts for the duration for each tar- get, until the target has no Temporary Hit Points, or until the target leaves the form as a Bonus Action. #, CHAPTER \| SPELLS # Animate Dead Level 3 Necromancy (Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 10 feet Components: V, S, M (a drop of blood, a piece of flesh, and a pinch of bone dust) Duration: Instantaneous Choose a pile of bones or a corpse of a Medium or Small Humanoid within range. The target becomes an Undead creature: a Skeleton if you chose bones or a Zombie if you chose a corpse (see appendix B for the stat blocks). On each of your turns, you can take a Bonus Action to mentally command any creature you made with this spell if the creature is within 60 feet of you (if you control multiple creatures, you can command any of them at the same time, issu- ing the same command to each one). You decide what action the creature will take and where it will move on its next turn, or you can issue a general command, such as to guard a chamber or corridor, If you issue no commands, the creature takes the Dodge action and moves only to avoid harm. Once given an order, the creature continues to follow it until its task is complete. The creature is under your control for 24 hours, after which it stops obeying any command you've given it. To maintain control of the creature for an- other 24 hours, you must cast this spell on the crea- ture again before the current 24-hour period ends. This use of the spell reasserts your control over up to four creatures you have animated with this spell rather than animating a new creature. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You animate or reassert control over two additional Undead crea- tures for each spell slot level above 3. Each of the creatures must come from a different corpse or pile of bones. ANIMATE OBJECTS Level 5 Transmutation (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Objects animate at your command. Choose a num- ber of nonmagical objects within range that aren't being worn or carried, aren't fixed to a surface, and aren't Gargantuan. The maximum number of ob- jects is equal to your spellcasting ability modifier; for this number, a Medium or smalier target counts as one object, a Large target courits as two, anda Huge target counts as three. A Brazier AFFECTED BY THE Spere ANimaTE OBJECTS et Ta es '} ANIMATED OBJECT | Huge or Smaller Construct, Unaligned \| | Ac 15 | HP 10 (Medium or smaller), 20 (Large), 40 (Huge) | Speed 30 ft. } MOD SAVE MOD SAVE moo save \| | Stk 16 +3 +3 Dex10 +0 +0 Conl0 +0 +0 | Int 3-4 -4 Wis 3 -4 -4 CHal -5 -5 | Immunities Poison, Psychic; Charmed, Exhaustion, \| Frightened, Paralyzed, Poisoned | Senses Blindsight 30 ft., Passive Perception 6 | Languages Understands the languages you know | CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) ACTIONS | Slam. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: Force damage equal to 1d4 + 3 | (Medium or smaller), 2d6 + 3 + your spellcasting ability modifier (Large), or 2d12 + 3 + your spellcasting ability modifier (Huge). Each target animates, sprouts legs, and becomes a Construct that uses the Animated Object stat block; this creature is under your control until the spell ends or until it is reduced to 0 Hit Points. Each creature you make with this spell is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, it shares your Initiative count and takes its turn immediately after yours. Until the spet! ends, you can take a Bonus Action to mentally command any creature you made with this spell if the creature is within 500 feet of you (if you control multiple creatures, you can command any of them at the same time, issuing the same command to each one). If you issue no commands, the creature takes the Dodge action and moves only to avoid harm. When the creature drops to O Hit Points, it reverts to its object form, and any remain- ing damage carries over to that form. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The creature's Slam damage increases by 1d4 (Medium or smaller), 1d6 (Large), or 1d12 (Huge) for each spell slot level above 5.