# CHAPTER \| SPELLS PHANTASMAL FoRCE Level 2 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You attempt to craft an illusion in the mind of a creature you can see within range. The target makes an Intelligence saving throw. On a failed save, you create a phantasmal object, creature, or other phenomenon that is no larger than a 10-foot Cube and that is perceivable only to the target for the duration. The phantasm includes sound, tem- perature, and other stimuli. The target can take a Study action to examine the phantasm with an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If the check succeeds, the target realizes that the phantasm is an illusion, and the spell ends. While affected by the spell, the target treats the phantasm as if it were real and rationalizes any il- logical outcomes from interacting with it. For exam- ple, if the target steps through a phantasmal bridge and survives the fall, it believes the bridge exists and something else caused it to fall. An affected target can even take damage from the illusion if the phantasm represents a dangerous creature or hazard. On each of your turns, such a phantasm can deal 2d8 Psychic damage to the tar- get if it is in the phantasm's area or within 5 feet of the phantasm. The target perceives the damage as a type appropriate to the illusion. PHANTASMAL KILLER Level 4 Illusion (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You tap into the nightmares of a creature you can see within range and create an illusion of its deepest fears, visible only to that creature. The target makes a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the target takes 4d10 Psychic damage and has Disadvantage on ability checks and attack rolls for the duration. Ona successful save, the target takes half as much damage, and the spell ends. For the duration, the target makes a Wisdom sav- ing throw at the end of each of its turns. On a failed save, it takes the Psychic damage again. On a suc- cessful save, the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 4. TER 7 \| SPELLS # Phantom Steed # Phantom Steed Level 3 Illusion (Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour A Large, quasi-real, horselike creature appears on the ground in an unoccupied space of your choice within range. You decide the creature's appearance, and it is equipped with a saddle, bit, and bridle. Any of the equipment created by the spell vanishes in a puff of smoke if it is carried more than 10 feet away from the steed. For the duration, you or a creature you choose can ride the steed. The steed uses the Riding Horse stat block (see appendix B), except it has a Speed of 100 feet and can travel 13 miles in an hour. When the spell ends, the steed gradually fades, giving the rider 1 minute to dismount. The spell ends early if the steed takes any damage. PLANAR ALLY Level 6 Conjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You beseech an otherworldly entity for aid. The being must be known to you: a god, a demon prince, or some other being of cosmic power. That entity # Pyem) DAWES sends a Celestial, an Elemental, or a Fiend loyal to it to aid you. making the creature appear in an un- occupied space within range. If you know a specific creature's name, you can speak that name when you cast this spell to request that creature, though you might get a different creature anyway (DM's choice). When the creature appears, it is under no com- pulsion to behave a particular way. You can ask it to perform a service in exchange for payment, but it isn't obliged to do so. The requested task could range from simple (fly us across the chasm, or help us fight a battle) to complex (spy on our enemies, or protect us during our foray into the dungeon). You must be able to communicate with the creature to bargain for its services. Payment can take a variety of forms. A Celestial might require a sizable donation of gold or magic items to an allied temple, while a Fiend might de- mand a living sacrifice or a gift of treasure. Some creatures might exchange their service for a quest undertaken by you. A task that can be measured in minutes requires a payment worth 100 GP per minute. A task mea- sured in hours requires 1,000 GP per hour. And a task measured in days (up to 10 days) requires 10,000 GP per day. The DM can adjust these pay- ments based on the circumstances under which you cast the spell. If the task is aligned with the crea- ture's ethos, the payment might be halved or even waived. Nonhazardous tasks typically require only half the suggested payment, while especially dan- gerous tasks might require a greater gift. Creatures rarely accept tasks that seem suicidal. After the creature completes the task, or when the agreed-upon duration of service expires, the crea- ture returns to its home plane after reporting back to you if possible. If you are unable to agree on a price for the creature's service, the creature imme- diately returns to its home plane. PLANAR BINDING Level 5 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a jewel worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: 24 hours You attempt to bind a Celestial, an Elemental, a Fey, or a Fiend to your service. The creature must be within range for the entire casting of the spell. (Typically, the creature is first summoned into the center of the inverted version of the Magic Circle spell to tvap it while this spell is cast.) At the > fo completion of the casting, the target must succeed ona Charisma saving throw or be bound to serve you for the duration. If the creature was summoned or created by another spell, that spell's duration is extended to match the duration of this spell. Abound creature must follow your commands to the best of its ability. You might command the creature to accompany you on an adventure, to guard a location, or to deliver a message. If the creature is Hostile, it strives to twist your com- mands to achieve its own objectives. If the creature carries out your commands completely before the spell ends, it travels to you to report this fact if you are on the same plane of existence. If you are on a different plane, it returns to the place where you bound it and remains there until the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The duration increases with a spell slot of level 6 (10 days), 7 (30 days), 8 (180 days), and 9 (366 days). # Plane Shift Level 7 Conjuration (Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a forked, metal rod worth 250+ GP and attuned to a plane of existence) Duration: Instantaneous You and up to eight willing creatures who link hands ina circle are transported to a different plane of existence. You can specify a target destination in general terms, such as the City of Brass on the Elemental Plane of Fire or the palace of Dispater on the second level of the Nine Hells, and you appear in or near that destination, as determined by the DM. Alternatively, if you know the sigil sequence of a teleportation circle on another plane of existence, this spell can take you to that circle. If the telepor- tation circle is too small to hold all the creatures you transported, they appear in the closest unoccu- pied spaces next to the circle. PLANT GROWTH Level 3 Transmutation (Bard, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action (Overgrowth) or 8 hours (Enrichment) Range: 150 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous This spell channels vitality into plants. The casting time you use determines whether the spell has th e b Overgrowth or the Enric on that point become thick and overgrown. A crea- ture moving through that area must spend 4 feet of 1 movement for every 1 foot it moves. You can exclude one or more areas of any size within the spell's area i from being affected. Enrichment. All plants in a half-mile radius cen- tered on a point within range become enriched for 365 days. The plants yield twice the normal amount of food when harvested. They can benefit from only one Plant Growth per year. POISON SPRAY Necromancy Cantrip (Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You spray toxic mist at a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. Ona hit, the target takes 1d12 Poison damage. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d12 when you reach levels 5 (2d12), 11 (3d12), and 17 (4d12). POLYMORPH Level 4 Transmutation (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a caterpillar cocoon) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You attempt to transform a creature that you can see within range into a Beast. The target must suc- ceed on a Wisdom saving throw or shape-shift into a Beast form for the duration. That form can be any Beast you choose that has a Challenge Rating equal to or less than the target's (or the target's level if it doesn't have a Challenge Rating). The target's game statistics are replaced by the stat block of the chosen Beast, but the target retains its alignment, personality, creature type, Hit Points, and Hit Point Dice. See appendix B for a sample of Beast stat blocks. The target gains a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to the Hit Points of the Beast form. The spell ends early on the target if it has no Temporary Hit Points left. The target is limited in the actions it can perform by the anatomy of its new form, and it can't speak eee Pe 'The target's gear melds into the new form. The re can't use or otherwise benefit from any of POWER WoRD FORTIFY Level 7 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Component: V Duration: Instantaneous You fortify up to six creatures you can see within range. The spell bestows 120 Temporary Hit Points, which you divide among the spell's recipients. POWER WoRD HEAL Level 9 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Component: V Duration: Instantaneous A wave of healing energy washes over one creature you can see within range. The target regains all its Hit Points. If the creature has the Charmed, Fright- ened, Paralyzed, Poisoned, or Stunned condition, the condition ends. If the creature has the Prone condition, it can use its Reaction to stand up. POWER WoRD KILL Level 9 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Component: V Duration: Instantaneous You compel one creature you can see within range to die. If the target has 100 Hit Points or fewer, it dies. Otherwise, it takes 12d12 Psychic damage. PowER WorD STUN Level 8 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You overwhelm the mind of one creature you can see within range. If the target has 150 Hit Points or fewer, it has the Stunned condition. Otherwise, its Speed is O until the start of your next turn. The Stunned target makes a Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the condition on itself on a success. # Nodall Mackey RAN PRAYER OF HEALING Level 2 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 30 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous Up to five creatures of your choice who remain within range for the spell's entire casting gain the benefits of a Short Rest and also regain 2d8 Hit Points. A creature can't be affected by this spell again until that creature finishes a Long Rest. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 2. PRESTIDIGITATION Transmutation Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 10 feet A OWARF HAD AN UNFORTUNATE ENCOUNTER Components: V, S WITH THE INDIGO RAY OF Prismaric SPRAY. Duration: Up to 1 hour ei. ie # Rismatic Rays You create a magical effect within range. Choose H the effect from the options below. If you cast this 1d8 Ray i spell multiple times, you can have up to three of its 1 Red. Failed Save: 12d6 Fire damage. Successful ' non-instantaneous effects active at a time. Save: Half as much damage. Vy Sensory Effect. You create an instantaneous, 2 Orange. Failed Save: 12d6 Acid damage. Suc-: harmless sensory effect, such as a shower of sparks, e:; cessful Save: Half as much damage. a puff of wind, faint musical notes, or an odd odor. Fire Play. You instantaneously light or snuff out a 3 Yellow. Failed Save: 12d6 Lightning damage. \| candle, a torch, or a small campfire. Successful Save: Half as much damage. \| Clean or Soil. You instantaneously clean or soil an 4 Green. Failed Save: 12d6 Poison damage. Suc- 1 object no larger than 1 cubic foot. cessful Save: Half as much damage. Minor Sensation. You chill, warm, or flavor up to 1 5 Blue. Failed Save: 12d6 Cold damage. Success- i cubic foot of nonliving material for 1 hour. ul Save: Half hd ' Magic Mark. You make a color, a small mark, or a fi Se l 6 Indigo. Failed Save: The target has the Re- \| symbol appear on an object or a surface for 1 hour. s 4 RES Minor Creation. You create a nonmagical trinket strained condition and makes a Constitution or an illusory image that can fit in your hand. It saving throw at the end of each of its turns. If lasts until the end of your next turn. A trinket can it successfully saves three times, the condition deal no damage and has no monetary worth. ends. Ifit fails three times, it has the Petrified condition until it is freed by an effect like the Greater Restoration spell. The successes and PRISMATIC SPRAY failures needn't be consecutive; keep track of Level 7 Evocation (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) both until the target collects three of a kind. Casting Time: Action 7 Violet. Failed Save: The target has the Blinded Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous condition and makes a Wisdom saving throw at the start of your next turn. On a successful save, the condition ends. On a failed save, the Eight rays of light flash from you in a 60-foot Cone. condition ends, and the creature teleports to Each creature in the Cone makes a Dexterity saving another plane of existence (DM's choice). throw. For each target, roll 1d8 to determine which color ray afiects it, consulting the Prismatic Rays table. Special. The target is struck by two rays. Roll twice, rerolling any 8. 4 --- Z ed Ae; al re av a \_ CHAPTER \| SPELLS \ i ---- i Order # Prismatic Wall 1 Level 9 Abjuration (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: 10 minutes Ashimmering, multicolored plane of light forms a vertical opaque wall---up to 90 feet long, 30 feet high, and 1 inch thick---centered on a point within range. Alternatively, you shape the wall into a globe up to 30 feet in diameter centered on a point within range. The wall lasts for the duration. If you posi- tion the wall in a space occupied by a creature, the ' spell ends instantly without effect. The wall sheds Bright Light within 100 feet and Dim Light for an additional 100 feet. You and crea- tures you designate when you cast the spell can pass through and be near the wall without harm. If 4 another creature that can see the wall moves within 20 feet of it or starts its turn there, the creature must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or have the Blinded condition for 1 minute. The wall consists of seven layers, each with a different color. When a creature reaches into or passes through the wall, it does so one layer at a time through all the layers. Each layer forces the creature to make a Dexterity saving throw or be af- fected by that layer's properties as described in the 6 Prismatic Layers table. The wall, which has AC 10, can be destroyed one layer at a time, in order from red to violet, by means specific to each layer. If a layer is destroyed, it is gone for the duration. Antimagic Field has no effect on the wall, and Dispel Magic can affect only the vio- let layer. PRODUCE FLAME Conjuration Cantrip (Druid) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S 7 Duration: 10 minutes A flickering flame appears in your hand and remains there for the duration. While there, the flame emits no heat and ignites nothing, and it sheds Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. The spell ends if you cast it again. Until the spell ends, you can take a Magic action to hurl fire at a creature or an object within 60 feet of you. Make a ranged spell attack. On a hit, the tar- get takes 1d8 Fire damage. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d8 when you reach levels 5 (2d8), 11 (3d8), and 17 (4d8). CHAPTER \| SPELLS PrismMaTIC LAYERS Effects Red. Failed Save: 12d6 Fire damage. Success- ful Save: Half as much damage. Additional Effects: Nonmagical ranged attacks can't pass through this layer, which is destroyed if it takes at least 25 Cold damage. Orange. Failed Save: 12d6 Acid damage. Successful Save: Half as much damage. Ad- ditional Effects: Magical ranged attacks can't pass through this layer, which is destroyed by a strong wind (such as the one created by Gust of Wind). Yellow. Failed Save: 12d6 Lightning damage. Successful Save: Half as much damage. Addi- tional Effects: The layer is destroyed if it takes at least 60 Force damage. Green. Failed Save: 12d6 Poison damage. Successful Save: Half as much damage. Ad- ditional Effects: A Passwall spell, or another spell of equal or greater level that can open a portal on a solid surface, destroys this layer. Blue. Failed Save: 12d6 Cold damage. Suc- cessful Save: Half as much damage. Addi- tional Effects: The layer is destroyed if it takes at least 25 Fire damage. Indigo. Failed Save: The target has the Re- strained condition and makes a Constitu- tion saving throw at the end of each of its turns. If it successfully saves three times, the condition ends. If it fails three times, it has the Petrified condition until it is freed by an effect like the Greater Restoration spell. The successes and failures needn't be con- secutive; keep track of both until the target collects three of a kind. Additional Effects: Spells can't be cast through this layer, which is destroyed by Bright Light shed by the Daylight spell. Violet. Failed Save: The target has the Blinded condition and makes a Wisdom sav- ing throw at the start of your next turn. On a successful save, the condition ends. Ona failed save, the condition ends, and the crea- ture teleports to another plane of existence (DM's choice). Additional Effects: This layer is destroyed by Dispel Magic. A SPELLCASTER COULD USE PROGRAMMED ILLUSION TO CAUSE A waren00G TO APPEAR ANO KINOLY ask INTRUDERS TO LEAVE # Programmed Illusion Level 6 Illusion (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (jade dust worth 25+ GP) Duration: Until dispelled You create an illusion of an object, a creature, or some other visible phenomenon within range that activates when a specific trigger occurs. The illusion is imperceptible until then. It must be no larger than a 30-foot Cube, and you decide when you cast the spell how the illusion behaves and what sounds it makes. This scripted performance can last up to 5 minutes. When the trigger you specify occurs, the illusion springs into existence and performs in the manner you described. Once the illusion finishes perform- ing, it disappears and remains dormant for 10 min- utes, after which the illusion can be activated again. The trigger can be as general or as detailed as you like, though it must be based on visual or audible phenomena that occur within 30 feet of the area. For example, you could create an illusion of yourself to appear and warn off others who attempt to open a trapped door. Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be illusory, since things can pass through it. A creature that takes the Study action to examine the image can determine that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature can see through the image, and any noise it makes sounds hollow to the creature llusion (Bard, Wizard) ing Time: Action "Ss ng Range: 500 miles Components: V, S, M (a statuette of yourself worth 5+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day You create an illusory copy of yourself that lasts for the duration. The copy can appear at any location within range that you have seen before, regardless of intervening obstacles. The illusion looks and sounds like you, but it is intangible. If the illusion takes any damage, it disappears, and the spell ends. You can see through the illusion's eyes and hear through its ears as if you were in its space. Asa Magic action, you can move it up to 60 feet and make it gesture, speak, and behave in whatever way you choose. It mimics your mannerisms perfectly. Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be illusory, since things can pass through it. A creature that takes the Study action to examine the image can determine that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. Ifa creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature can see through the image, and any noise it makes sounds hollow to the creature. # Protection From Energy Level 3 Abjuration (Cleric, Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour For the duration, the willing creature you touch has Resistance to one damage type of your choice: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder. # 2 Oo PROTECTION FROM EviIL AND Goop Level 1 Abjuration (Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Warlock, Wizard) ® Casting Time: Action. Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a flask of Holy Water worth 25+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Concentration up to 10 minutes is protected against creatures that are Aberrations Cele lementals, Fey, Fiends, or Undeac everal benefits. Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch ei a | A wuman Creric casts Raise Deao ro # Return A Fallen Comrade To Life Whe against the target. The target also can't be pos- sessed by or gain the Charmed or Frightened condi- tions from them. If the target is already possessed, Charmed, or Frightened by such a creature, the target has Advantage on any new saving throw against the relevant effect. PROTECTION FROM POISON Level 2 Abjuration (Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour You touch a creature and end the Poisoned condi- tion on it. For the duration, the target has Advan- tage on saving throws to avoid or end the Poisoned condition, and it has Resistance to Poison damage. Puriry Foop AnD DRINK Level 1 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Paladin) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 10 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You remove poison and rot from nonmagical food and drink in a 5-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point within range. glo h CHAPTER \| SPELLS RAISE DEAD Level 5 Necromancy (Bard, Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth 500+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous With a touch, you revive a dead creature if it has been dead no longer than 10 days and it wasn't Un- dead when it died. The creature returns to life with 1 Hit Point. This spell also neutralizes any poisons that affected the creature at the time of death. This spell closes all mortal wounds, but it doesn't restore missing body parts. If the creature is lacking body parts or organs integral for its survival---its head, for instance---the spell automatically fails. Coming back from the dead is an ordeal. The tar- get takes a -4 penalty to D20 Tests. Every time the target finishes a Long Rest, the penalty is reduced by 1 until it becomes 0. POLAR ENGite Rary's TELEPATHIG BOND Level 5 Divination (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (two eggs) Duration: 1 hour You forge a telepathic link among up to eight willing creatures of your choice within range, psychically linking each creature to all the others for the dura- tion. Creatures that can't communicate in any lan- guages aren't affected by this spell. Until the spell ends, the targets can communicate telepathically through the bond whether or not they share a language. The communication is possible over any distance, though it can't extend to other planes of existence. Ray OF ENFEEBLEMENT Level 2 Necromancy (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A beam of enervating energy shoots from you toward a creature within range. The target must make a Constitution saving throw. On a successful save, the target has Disadvantage on the next attack roll it makes until the start of your next turn. On a failed save, the target has Disadvantage on Strength-based D20 Tests for the duration. During that time, it also subtracts 1d8 from all its damage rolls. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the spell on a success. Ray OF FROST Evocation Cantrip (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A frigid beam of blue-white light streaks toward a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, it takes 1d8 Cold dam- age, and its Speed is reduced by 10 feet until the start of your next turn. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d8 when you reach levels 5 (2d8), 11 (348), and 17 (4d8). Ray OF SICKNESS Level 1 Necromancy (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You shoot a greenish ray at a creature within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target.Ona hit, the target takes 2d8 Poison damage and has the Poisoned condition until the end of your next turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 1. REGENERATE Level 7 Transmutation (Bard, Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a prayer wheel) Duration: 1 hour A creature you touch regains 4d8 + 15 Hit Points. For the duration, the target regains 1 Hit Point at the start of each of its turns, and any severed body parts regrow after 2 minutes. REINCARNATE Level 5 Necromancy (Druid) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (rare oils worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You touch a dead Humanoid or a piece of one. If the creature has been dead no longer than 10 days, the spell forms a new body for it and calls the soul \_ to enter that body. Roll 1d10 and consult the table below to determine the body's species, or the DM chooses another playable species. 1d10 Species 1d10 Species 1 Aasimar 6 Goliath 2 Dragonborn 7 Halfling 3. Dwarf 8 Human 4 Elf 9 Ore 5 Gnome 10 Tiefling creature makes any choices th n offers, and the creatui REMOVE CURSE Level 3 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous At your touch, all curses affecting one creature or object end. If the object is a cursed magic item, its curse remains, but the spell breaks its owner's Attunement to the object so it can be removed or discarded. RESISTANCE Abjuration Cantrip (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Component: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You touch a willing creature and choose a damage type: Acid, Bludgeoning, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Ne- crotic, Piercing, Poison, Radiant, Slashing, or Thun- der. When the creature takes damage of the chosen type before the spell ends, the creature reduces the total damage taken by 1d4. A creature can benefit from this spell only once per turn. RESURRECTION Level 7 Necromancy (Bard, Cleric) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous With a touch, you revive a dead creature that has been dead for no more than a century, didn't die of old age, and wasn't Undead when it died. The creature returns to life with all its Hit Points. This spell also neutralizes any poisons that affected the creature at the time of death. This spell closes all mortal wounds and restores any missing body parts. Coming back from the dead is an ordeal. The tar- get takes a -4 penalty to D20 Tests. Every time the target finishes a Long Rest, the penalty is reduced by 1 until it becomes 0. Casting this spell to revive a creature that has been dead for 365 days or longer taxes you. Until you finish a Long Rest, you can't cast spells again, and you have Disadvantage on D20 Tests. REVERSE GRAVITY Level 7 Transmutation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 100 feet Components: V, S, M (a lodestone and iron filings) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute This spell reverses gravity in a 50-foot-radius, 100- foot high Cylinder centered on a point within range. All creatures and objects in that area that aren't anchored to the ground fall upward and reach the top of the Cylinder. A creature can make a Dexter- ity saving throw to grab a fixed object it can reach, thus avoiding the fall upward. If a ceiling or an anchored object is encountered in this upward fall, creatures and objects strike it just as they would during a downward fall. If an af- fected creature or object reaches the Cylinder's top without striking anything, it hovers there for the duration. When the spell ends, affected objects and creatures fall downward. REVIVIFY Level 3 Necromancy (Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth 300+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You touch a creature that has died within the last minute. That creature revives with 1 Hit Point. This spell can't revive a creature that has died of old age, nor does it restore any missing body parts. Rope TRICK Level 2 Transmutation (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a segment of rope) Duration: 1 hour You touch a rope. One end of it hovers upward until the rope hangs perpendicular to the ground or the rope reaches a ceiling. At the rope's upper end, an Invisible 3-foot-by-5-foot porta\] opens to an extradimensional space that lasts until the spell ends. That space can be reached by climbing the rope, which can be pulled into or dropped out of it. The space can hold up to eight Medium or smaller creatures, Attacks, spells, and other effects can't pass into or out of the space, but creatures inside it can see through the portal. Anything inside the space drops out when the spell er:ds, SACRED FLAME Evocation Cantrip (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Flame-like radiance descends on a creature that you can see within range. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 1d8 Radiant dam- age. The target gains no benefit from Half Cover or Three-Quarters Cover for this save. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d8 when you reach levels 5 (2d8), 11 (3d8), and 17 (4d8). SANCTUARY Level 1 Abjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a shard of glass from a mirror) Duration: 1 minute You ward a creature within range. Until the spell ends, any creature who targets the warded creature with an attack roll or a damaging spell must succeed ona Wisdom saving throw or either choose a new target or lose the attack or spell. This spell doesn't protect the warded creature from areas of effect. The spell ends '{ the warded creature makes an at- tack roll, casts 2 spell, or deals damage. THE SCRYING SPELL HELPS A GNOME BaRO KEEP IN ToucH WITH FRIENOS AND # Family Around The Worlo. ScorcHINnG Ray Level 2 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You hurl three fiery rays. You can hurl them at one target within range or at several. Make a ranged spell attack for each ray. On a hit, the target takes 2d6 Fire damage. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You create one ad- ditional ray for each spell slot level above 2. ScryINc Level 5 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a focus worth 1,000+ GP, such as a crystal ball, mirror, or water-filled font) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You can see and hear a creature you choose that is on the same plane of existence as you. The target makes a Wisdom saving throw, which is modified (see the tables below) by how well you know the target and the sort of physical connection you have # CHAPTER \| SPELLS to it. The target doesn't know what it is making the save against, only that it feels uneasy. Your Knowledge of the Target Is... Save Modifier Secondhand (heard of the target) +5 Firsthand (met the target) +0 -5 Extensive (know the target well) You Have the Target's... Save Modifier Picture or other likeness -2 Garment or other possession -4 Body part, lock of hair, or bit of nail -10 Ona successful save, the target isn't affected, and you can't use this spell on it again for 24 hours. On a failed save, the spell creates an Invisible, intangible sensor within 10 feet of the target. You can see and hear through the sensor as if you were there. The sensor moves with the target, remaining within 10 feet of it for the duration. If something can see the sensor, it appears as a luminous orb about the size of your fist. Instead of targeting a creature, you can target a location you have seen. When you do so, the sensor appears at that location and doesn't move. # Searing Smite Level 1 Evocation (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a target with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: 1 minute As you hit the target, it takes an extra 1d6 Fire dam- age from the attack. At the start of each of its turns until the spell ends, the target takes 1d6 Fire dam- age and then makes a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the spell continues. On a successful save, the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. All the damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. SEE INVISIBILITY Level 2 Divination (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a pinch of talc) Duration: 1 hour For the duration, you see creatures and objects that have the Invisible condition as if they were visible, and you can see into the Ethereal Plane. Creatures and objects there appear ghostly. SEEMING Level 5 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: 8 hours You give an illusory appearance to each creature of your choice that you can see within range. An un- willing target can make a Charisma saving throw, and if it succeeds, it is unaffected by this spell. You can give the same appearance or different ones to the targets. The spell can change the ap- pearance of the targets' bodies and equipment. You can make each creature seem 1 foot shorter or taller and appear heavier or lighter. A target's new ap- pearance must have the same basic arrangement of limbs as the target, but the extent of the illusion is otherwise up to you. The spell lasts for the duration. The changes wrought by this spell fail to hold up to physical inspection. For example, if you use this spell to add a hat to a creature's outfit, objects pass through the hat. A creature that takes the Study action to examine a target can make an Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If it succeeds, it becomes aware that the target is disguised. SENDING Level 3 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Unlimited Components: V, S, M (a copper wire) Duration: Instantaneous You send a short message of 25 words or fewer to a creature you have met or a creature described to you by someone who has met it. The target hears the message in its mind, recognizes you as the sender if it knows you, and can answer in a like manner immediately. The spell enables targets to understand the meaning of your message. You can send the message across any distance and even to other planes of existence, but if the target is on a different plane than you, there is a 5 percent chance that the message doesn't arrive. You know if the delivery fails. Upon receiving your message, a creature can block your ability to reach it again with this spell for 8 hours. If you try to send snother message during that time, you learn that you are blocked, and the spell fails. AGHA: BROU! RivaL MAGES USE SHAPECHANGE TO TRANSFORM INTO A BEHOLDER AND A BEHIR # During A Magical Quel SEQUESTER Level 7 Transmutation (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (gem dust worth 5,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled With a touch, you magically sequester an object ora willing creature. For the duration, the target has the Invisible condition and can't be targeted by Divina- tion spells, detected by magic, or viewed remotely with magic. If the target is a creature, it enters a state of sus- pended animation; it has the Unconscious condition, doesn't age, and doesn't need food, water, or air. You can set a condition for the spell to end early. The condition can be anything you choose, but it must occur or be visible within 1 mile of the target. Examples include "after 1,000 years" or "when the tarrasque awakens." This spell also ends if the tar- get takes any damage. Sens ee Oe, HAPTER? \| SPELLS' ma te SHAPECHANGE Level 9 Transmutation (Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a jade circlet worth 1,500+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You shape-shift into another creature for the dura- tion or until you take a Magic action to shape-shift into a different eligible form. The new form must be of a creature that has a Challenge Rating no higher than your level or Challenge Rating. You must have seen the sort of creature before, and it can't bea Construct or an Undead. When you shape-shift, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to the Hit Points of the form. The spell ends early if you have no Temporary Hit Points left. Your game statistics are replaced by the stat block of the chosen form, but you retain your creature type; alignment; personality; Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores; Hit Points; Hit Point Dice; proficiencies; and ability to communicate. If you have the Spellcasting feature, you retain it too. Upon shape-shifting, you determine whether your equipment drops to the ground or changes in size and shape to fit the new form while you're in it. SHATTER Level 2 Evocation (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a chip of mica) Duration: Instantaneous A loud noise erupts from a point of your choice within range. Each creature in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered there makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 3d8 Thunder damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A Con- struct has Disadvantage on the save. A nonmagical object that isn't being worn or car- ried also takes the damage if it's in the spell's area. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 2. SHIELD Level 1 Abjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Reaction, which you take when you are hit by an attack roll or targeted by the Magic Missile spell Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: 1 round An imperceptible barrier of magical force protects you. Until the start of your next turn, you have a +5 bonus to AC, including against the triggering attack, and you take no damage from Magic Missile.