# CHAPTER \| SPELLS mark on that object and invisibly ins:: -!.es the ob- ject's name on the sapphire. Each tiny you cast this spell, you must use a different sapphir«. Thereafter, you can take a Magic action to speak the object's name and crush the sapphire. The ob- ject instantly appears in your hand regardless of physical or planar distances, and the spell ends. If another creature is holding or carrying the ob- ject, crushing the sapphire doesn't transport it, but instead you learn who that creature is and where that creature is currently located. DREAM Level 5 Illusion (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Special Components: V, S, M (a handful of sand) Duration: 8 hours You target a creature you know on the same plane of existence. You or a willing creature you touch enters a trance state to act asa dream messenger. While in the trance, the messenger is Incapacitated and has a Speed of 0. If the target is asleep, the messenger appears in the target's dreams and can converse with the tar- get as long as it remains asleep, through the spell's duration. The messenger can also shape the dreams environment, creating landscapes, objects, and other images. The messenger can emerge from the trance at any time, ending the spell. The target re- calls the dream perfectly upon waking. If the target is awake when you cast the spell, the messenger knows it and can either end the trance (and the spell) or wait for the target to sleep, at which point the messenger enters its dreams. You can make the messenger terrifying to the tar- get. If you do so, the messenger can deliver a mes- sage of no more than ten words, and then the target makes a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the target gains no benefit from its rest, and it takes 3d6 Psychic damage when it wakes up. DRUIDCRAFT Transmutation Cantrip (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Whispering to the spirits of nature, you create one of the following effects wirhin range. Weather Sensor. You creaic a Tiny, harmless sen- sory effect that predicts what the weather will be at your location for the next 24 hours. The effect might manifest as a go!des: «wb for clear skies, a A sprITECASTS DruiocRAFT tO MAKE FLOWERS po BLOSSOM: cloud for rain, falling snowflakes for snow, and so on. This effect persists for 1 round. Bloom. You instantly make a flower blossom, a seed pod open, or a leaf bud bloom. Sensory Effect. You create a harmless sensory ef- fect, such as falling leaves, spectral dancing fairies, a gentle breeze, the sound of an animal, or the faint odor of skunk. The effect must fit in a S-foot Cube. Fire Play. You light or snuff out a candle, a torch, ora campfire. EARTHQUAKE Level 8 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Action Range: 500 feet Components: V, S, M (a fractured rock) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Choose a point on the ground that you can see within range. For the duration, an intense tremor rips through the ground in a 100-foot-radius circle centered on that point. The ground there is Difficult Terrain. When you cast this spell and at the end of each of your turns for the duration, each creature on the ground in the area makes a Dexterity saving throw. Ona failed save, a creature has the Prone condition, and its Concentration is broken. You can also cause the effects below. Fissures. A total of 1d6 fissures open in the spell's area at the end of the turn you cast it. You choose the fissures' locations, which can't be under struc- tures. Each fissure is 1d10 « 10 feet deep and 10 feet wide, and it extends from one edge of the spell's area to another edge. A creature in the same space as a fissure must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or fal! in. A creature that successfully saves moves with the fissure's edge as it opens. Structures. 'Che tremor deals 50 Bludgeoning damage to any structure in contact with the ground in the area when you cast the spell and at the end of each of your 'urns until the spell ends. If a structure drops to © Hix Points, it collapses. Acreature within a distance froma collapsing structure equal to half the structure's height makes a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the crea- ture takes 12d6 Bludgeoning damage, has the Prone condition, and is buried in the rubble, requiring a DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check as an action to escape. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage only. ELDRITCH BLAST Evocation Cantrip (Warlock) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You hurl a beam of crackling energy. Make a ranged spell attack against one creature or object in range. On a hit, the target takes 1d10 Force damage. Cantrip Upgrade. The spell creates two beams at level 5, three beams at level 11, and four beams at level 17. You can direct the beams at the same target or at different ones. Make a separate attack roll for each beam. ELEMENTALISM Transmutation Cantrip (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You exert control over the elements, creating one of the following effects within range. Beckon Air. You create a breeze strong enough to ripple cloth, stir dust, rustle leaves, and close open doors and shutters, all in a 5-foot Cube. Doors and shutters being held open by someone or something aren't affected. Beckon Earth. You create a thin shroud of dust or sand that covers surfaces in a 5-foot-square area, or you cause a single word to appear in your handwrit- ing in a patch of dirt or sand. Beckon Fire. You create a thin cloud of harmless embers and colored, scented smoke in a 5-foot Cube. You choose the color and scent, and the embers can light candles, torches, or lamps in that area. The smoke's scent lingers for 1 minute. Beckon Water. You create a spray of cool mist that lightly dampens creatures and objects in a 5-foot Cube. Alternatively, you create 1 cup of clean water either in an open container or on a surface, and the water evaporates in 1 minute. Sculpt Element. You cause dirt, sand, fire, smoke, mist, or water that can fit in a 1-foot Cube to assume a crude shape (such as that of a creature) for 1 hour. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 267 268 ae ELEMENTAL WEAPON Level 3 Transmutation (Druid, Paladin, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour A nonmagical weapon you touch becomes a magic weapon. Choose one of the following damage types: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder. For the du- ration, the weapon has a +1 bonus to attack rolls and deals an extra 1d4 damage of the chosen type when it hits. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. If you use a level 5-6 spell slot, the bonus to attack rolls increases to +2, and the extra damage increases to 2d4. If you use a level 7+ spell slot, the bonus increases to +3, and the extra damage increases to 3d4. ENHANCE ABILITY Level 2 Transmutation (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (fur or a feather) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You touch a creature and choose Strength, Dex- terity, Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma. For the duration, the target has Advantage on ability checks using the chosen ability. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 2. You can choose a different ability for each target. ENLARGE/REDUCE Level 2 Transmutation (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a pinch of powdered iron) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute For the duration, the spell enlarges or reduces a creature or an object you can see within range (see the chosen effect below). A targeted object must be neither worn nor carried. If the target is an un- willing creature, it can make a Constitution saving throw. On a successful save, the spell has no effect. Everything that a targeted creature is wearing and carrying changes size with it. Any item it drops returns to normal size at once. A thrown weapon or piece of ammunition returns to normal size imme- diately after it hits or misses a target. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS o Enlarge. The target's size increases by one cat- egory---from Medium to Large, for example. The target also has Advantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws. The target's attacks with its enlarged weapons or Unarmed Strikes deal an extra 1d4 damage on a hit. Reduce. The target's size decreases by one cate- gory---from Medium to Small, for example. The tar- get also has Disadvantage on Strength checks and Strength saving throws. The target's attacks with its reduced weapons or Unarmed Strikes deal 1d4 less damage on a hit (this can't reduce the damage below 1). # Ensnaring Strike Level 1 Conjuration (Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a creature with a weapon Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute As you hit the target, grasping vines appear on it, and it makes a Strength saving throw. A Large or larger creature has Advantage on this save. Ona failed save, the target has the Restrained condition until the spell ends. On a successful save, the vines shrivel away, and the spell ends. While Restrained, the target takes 1d6 Piercing damage at the start of each of its turns, The target or a creature within reach of it can take an action to make a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC. Ona success, the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. ENTANGLE Level 1 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Grasping plants sprout from the ground in a 20-foot square within range. For the duration, these plants turn the ground in the area into Difficult Terrain. They disappear when the spell ends. Each creature (other than you) in the area when you cast the spell must succeed on a Strength sav- ing throw or have the Restrained condition until the spell ends. A Restrained creature can take an action to make a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC. On a success, it frees itself from the grasping plants and is no Jonger Restrained by them. ENTHRALL Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Warlock) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You weave a distracting string of words, causing creatures of your choice that you can see within range to make a Wisdom saving throw. Any crea- ture you or your companions are fighting automati- cally succeeds on this save. On a failed save, a target has a -10 penalty to Wisdom (Perception) checks and Passive Perception until the spell ends. ETHEREALNESS Level 7 Conjuration (Bard, Cleric, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Up to 8 hours You step into the border regions of the Ethereal Plane, where it overlaps with your current plane. A oRAGONBORN Dauio uses ENTANGLE # To Stop Rampaging Gnolls. You remain in the Border Ethereal for the duration. During this time, you can move in any direction. If you move up or down, every foot of movement costs an extra foot. You can perceive the plane you left, which looks gray, and you can't see anything there more than 60 feet away. While on the Ethereal Plane, you can affect and be affected only by creatures, objects, and effects on that plane. Creatures that aren't on the Ethereal Plane can't perceive or interact with you unless a feature gives them the ability to do so. When the spell ends, you return to the plane you left in the spot that corresponds to your space in the Border Ethereal. If you appear in an occupied space, you are shunted to the nearest unoccupied space and take Force damage equal to twice the number of feet you are moved. This spell ends instantly if you cast it while you are on the Ethereal Plane or a plane that doesn't border it, such as one of the Outer Planes. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target up to three willing creatures (including yourself) for each spell slot level above 7. The creatures must be within 10 feet of you when you cast the spell. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 4 269 ee eS Ae EY | CHAPTER \| SPELLS Evarp's BLACK TENTACLES Level 4 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a tentacle) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Squirming, ebony tentacles fill a 20-foot square on ground that you can see within range. For the du- ration, these tentacles turn the ground in that area into Difficult Terrain. Each creature in that area makes a Strength sav- ing throw. On a failed save, it takes 3d6 Bludgeon- ing damage, and it has the Restrained condition until the spell ends. A creature also makes that save if it enters the area or ends it turn there. A creature makes that save only once per turn. A Restrained creature can take an action to make a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC, ending the condition on itself on a success. EXPEDITIOUS RETREAT Level 1 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You take the Dash action, and until the spell ends, you can take that action again as a Bonus Action. EYEBITE Level 6 Necromancy (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute For the duration, your eyes become an inky void. One creature of your choice within 60 feet of you that you can see must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be affected by one of the following effects of your choice for the duration. On each of your turns until the spell ends, you can take a Magic action to target another creature but can't target a creature again if it has succeeded ona save against this casting of the spell. Asleep. The target has the Unconscious condition. It wakes up if it takes any damage or if another creature takes an action to shake it awake. Panicked. The target has the Frightened condition. On each of its turns, the Frightened target must take the Dash action and move away from you by the safest and shortest route available. If the target moves to a space at least 60 feet away from you where it can't see you, this effect ends. Sickened. The target has the Poisoned condition, FABRICATE Level 4 Transmutation (Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You convert raw materials into products of the same material. For example, you can fabricate a wooden bridge from a clump of trees, a rope froma patch of hemp, or clothes from flax or wool. Choose raw materials that you can see within range. You can fabricate a Large or smaller object (contained within a 10-foot Cube or eight connected 5-foot Cubes) given a sufficient quantity of mate- rial. If you're working with metal, stone, or another mineral substance, however, the fabricated object can be no larger than Medium (contained within a 5-foot Cube). The quality of any fabricated objects is based on the quality of the raw materials. Creatures and magic items can't be created by this spell. You also can't use it to create items that require a high degree of skill---such as weapons and armor---unless you have proficiency with the type of Artisan's Tools used to craft such objects. FAERIE FIRE Level 1 Evocation (Bard, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Objects in a 20-foot Cube within range are out- lined in blue, green, or violet light (your choice). Each creature in the Cube is also outlined if it fails a Dexterity saving throw. For the duration, objects and affected creatures shed Dim Light in a 10-foot radius and can't benefit from the Invisible condition. Attack rolls against an affected creature or object have Advantage if the attacker can see it. FALSE LIFE Level 1 Necromancy (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a drop of alcohol) Duration: Instantaneous You gain 2d4 + 4 Temporary Hit Points. Using a fii;her-Level Spell Slot. You gain 5 addi- tional Ten» 9rary Hit Points for each spell slot level above 1. FEAR Level 3 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a white feather) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Each creature in a 30-foot Cone must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or drop whatever it is holding and have the Frightened condition for the duration. A Frightened creature takes the Dash action and moves away from you by the safest route on each of its turns unless there is nowhere to move. If the creature ends its turn in a space where it doesn't have line of sight to you, the creature makes a Wis- dom saving throw. On a successful save, the spell ends on that creature. FEATHER FALL Level 1 Transmutation (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Reaction, which you take when you or a creature you can see within 60 feet of you falls Range: 60 feet Components: V, M (a small feather or piece of down) Duration: 1 minute Choose up to five falling creatures within range. A falling creature's rate of descent slows to 60 feet per round until the spell ends. If a creature lands before the spell ends, the creature takes no damage from the fall, and the spell ends for that creature. FEIGN DEATH Level 3 Necromancy (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a pinch of graveyard dirt) Duration: 1 hour You touch a willing creature and put it into a cata- leptic state that is indistinguishable from death. For the duration, the target appears dead to out- ward inspection and to spells used to determine the target's status. The target has the Blinded and Inca- pacitated conditions, and its Speed is 0. The target also has Resistance to all damage ex- cept Psychic damage, and it has Immunity to the Poisoned condition. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS orl 272. Spirits SUMMONED BY Fino FAMILIAR TAKE FORMS INSPIRED BY THE MAGES WHO # Conjure Them. FIND FAMILIAR Level 1 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour or Ritual Range: 10 feet Components: V, S, M (burning incense worth 10+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You gain the service of a familiar, a spirit that takes an animal form you choose: Bat, Cat, Frog, Hawk, Lizard, Octopus, Owl, Rat, Raven, Spider, Weasel, or another Beast that has a Challenge Rating of 0. Appearing in an unoccupied space within range, the familiar has the statistics of the chosen form (see appendix B), though it is a Celestial, Fey, or Fiend (your choice) instead of a Beast. Your familiar acts independently of you, but it obeys your commands. Telepathic Connection. While your familiar is within 100 feet of you, you can communicate with it telepathically. Additionally, as a Bonus Action, you can see through the familiar's eyes and hear what it hears until the start of your next turn, gain- ing the benefits of any special senses it has. Finally, when you cast a spell with a range of touch, your familiar can deliver the touch. Your familiar must be within 100 feet of you, and it must take a Reaction to deliver the touch when you cast the spell. Combat. The familiar is an ally to you and your allies, It rolls its own Initiative and acts on its own turn. A familiar can't attack, but it can take other actions as normal. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS Disappearance of the Familiar. When the familiar drops to O Hit Points, it disappears. It reappears after you cast this spell again. As a Magic action, you can temporarily dismiss the familiar to a pocket dimension. Alternatively, you can dismiss it forever. As a Magic action while it is temporarily dismissed, you can cause it to reappear in an unoccupied space within 30 feet of you. Whenever the familiar drops to O Hit Points or disappears into the pocket dimen- sion, it leaves behind in its space anything it was wearing or carrying. One Familiar Only. You can't have more than one familiar at a time. If you cast this spell while you have a familiar, you instead cause it to adopt a new eligible form. FIND STEED Level 2 Conjuration (Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Component: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You summon an otherworldly being that appears as a loyal steed in an unoccupied space of your choice within range. This creature uses the Otherworldly Steed stat block. If you already have a steed from this spell, the steed is replaced by the new one. The steed resembles a Large, rideable animal of your choice, such as a horse, a camel, a dire wolf, or an elk, Whenever you cast the spell, choose the steed's creature type---Celestial, Fey, or Fiend--- which determines certain traits in the stat block. oo" ( OTHER WORLDLY Steep el Py Large Celestial, Fey, or Fiend (Your Choice), Neutral AC 10 + 1 per spell level HP 5+ 10 per spell level (the steed has a number of Hit Dice \[d10s\] equal to the spell's level) Speed 60 ft., Fly 60 ft. (requires level 4+ spell) MOD. SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE str 18 +4 +4 Dex 12 +1 +1 Conl4 +2 42 Int 6 -2 -2 Wis 12 +1 +1 CHa8 -1 +1. Senses Passive Perception 11 Languages Telepathy 1 mile (works only with you) CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS Life Bond. When you regain Hit Points from a level 1+ spell, the steed regains the same number of Hit Points if you're within 5 feet of it. ACTIONS Otherworldly Slam. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 plus the spell's level of Radiant (Celestial), Psychic (Fey), or Ne- crotic (Fiend) damage. Bonus ACTIONS Fell Glare (Fiend Only; Recharges after a Long Rest). Wisdom Saving Throw: DC equals your spell save DC, one creature within 60 feet the steed can see. Failure: The target has the Frightened condition until the end of your next turn. Fey Step (Fey Only; Recharges after a Long Rest). The steed teleports, along with its rider, to an unoccupied space of your choice up to 60 feet away from itself. Healing Touch (Celestial Only; Recharges after a Long Rest). One creature within 5 feet of the steed regains a number of Hit Points equal to 2d8 plus the spell's level. Combat. The steed is an ally to you and your al- lies. In combat, it shares your Initiative count, and it functions as a controlled mount while you ride it (as defined in the rules on mounted combat). If you have the Incapacitated condition, the steed takes its turn immediately after yours and acts inde- pendently, focusing on protecting you. Disappearance of the Steed. The steed disappears if it drops to O Hit Points or if you die. When it dis- appears, it leaves behind anything it was wearing or carrying. If you cast this spell again, you decide whether you summon the steed that disappeared or a different one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. --- FIND THE PaTH Level 6 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a set of divination tools---such as cards or runes---worth 100+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 day You magically sense the most direct physical route to a location you name. You must be familiar with the location, and the spell fails if you name a desti- nation on another plane of existence, a moving destination (such as a mobile fortress), or an unspecific destination (such as "a green dragon's lair"). For the duration, as long as you are on the same plane of existence as the destination, you know how far it is and in what direction it lies. Whenever you face a choice of paths along the way there, you know which path is the most direct. # Find Traps Level 2 Divination (Cleric, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous \| You sense any trap within range that is within line } of sight. A trap, for the purpose of this spell, in- cludes any object or mechanism that was created to cause damage or other danger. Thus, the spell would sense the Alarm or Glyph of Warding spell or a mechanical pit trap, but it wouldn't reveal a natural weakness in the floor, an unstable ceiling, or a hid- den sinkhole. This spell reveals that a trap is present but not its location. You do learn the general nature of the danger posed by a trap you sense. FINGER OF DEATH Level 7 Necromancy (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You unleash negative energy toward a creature you can see within range. The target makes a Constitu- tion saving throw, taking 7d8 + 30 Necrotic damage ona failed save or half as much damage on a suc- cessful one. A Humanoid killed by this spell rises at the start of your next turn as a Zombie (see appendix B) that follows your verbal orders. CHAPTER7\| SPELLS = 27: 5 FIREBALL Level 3 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a ball of bat guano and sulfur) Duration: Instantaneous A bright streak flashes from you to a point you choose within range and then blossoms with a low roar into a fiery explosion. Each creature in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 8d6 Fire damage ona failed save or half as much damage on a suc- cessful one. Flammable objects in the area that aren't being worn or carried start burning. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 3. Fire Bort Evocation Cantrip (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You hurl a mote of fire at a creature or an object within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target takes 1d10 Fire damage. A flammable object hit by this spell starts burning if it isn't being worn or carried. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d10 when you reach levels 5 (2d10), 11 (3d10), and 17 (4d10). FIRE SHIELD Level 4 Evocation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a bit of phosphorus or a firefly) Duration: 10 minutes Wispy flames wreathe your body for the duration, shedding Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. The flames provide you with a warm shield or a chill shield, as you choose. The warm shield grants you Resistance to Cold damage, and the chill shield grants you Resistance to Fire damage. In addition, whenever a creature within 5 feet of you hits you with a melee attack roll, the shield erupts with flame. The attacker takes 2d8 Fire dam- age from a warm shield ov 2d8 Cold damage froma chill shield, FIRE STORM Level 7 Evocation (Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, s Duration: Instantaneous Astorm of fire appears within range. The area of the storm consists of up to ten 10-foot Cubes, which you arrange as you like. Each Cube must be contig- uous with at least one other Cube. Each creature in the area makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 7d10 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Flammable objects in the area that aren't being worn or carried start burning. # Flame Blade Level 2 Evocation (Druid, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a sumac leaf) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You evoke a fiery blade in your free hand. The blade is similar in size and shape to a scimitar, and it lasts for the duration. If you let go of the blade, it disap- pears, but you can evoke it again as a Bonus Action. Asa Magic action, you can make a melee spell at- tack with the fiery blade. On a hit, the target takes Fire damage equal to 3d6 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. The flaming blade sheds Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 2. FLAME STRIKE Level 5 Evocation (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a pinch of sulfur) Duration: Instantaneous A vertical column of brilliant fire roars down from above. Each creature in a 10-foot-radius, 40-foot- high Cylinder centered on a point within range makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d6 Fire damage and 5d6 Radiant damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Fire damage and the Radiant damage increase by 1d6 for each spell slot!2vel above 5. # Flaming Sphere Level 2 Conjuration (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a ball of wax) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a 5-foot-diameter sphere of fire in an un- occupied space on the ground within range. It lasts for the duration. Any creature that ends its turn within 5 feet of the sphere makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 2d6 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Asa Bonus Action, you can move the sphere up to 30 feet, rolling it along the ground. If you move the sphere into a creature's space, that creature makes the save against the sphere, and the sphere stops moving for the turn. When you move the sphere, you can direct it over barriers up to 5 feet tall and jump it across pits up to 10 feet wide. Flammable objects that aren't being worn or carried start burning if touched by the sphere, and it sheds Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 2. # Flesh To Stone Level 6 Transmutation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a cockatrice feather) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You attempt to turn one creature that you can see within range into stone. The target makes a Consti- tution saving throw. On a failed save, it has the Re- strained condition for the duration. On a successful save, its Speed is 0 until the start of your next turn. Constructs automatically succeed on the save. A Restrained target makes another Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns. If it successfully saves against this spell three times, the spell ends. If it fails its saves three times, it is turned to stone and has the Petrified condition for the duration. The successes and failures needn't be con- secutive; keep track of both until the target collects three of a kind. If you maintain your Concentration on this spell for the entire possible duration, the target is Pet- rified until the condition is ended by Greater Resto- ration or similar magic. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS ## 275 \% the Feywild, the Shadowfell, or the Plane Shift spell. FLy Level 3 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a feather) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You touch a willing creature. For the duration, the target gains a Fly Speed of 60 feet and can hover. When the spell ends, the target falls if it is still aloft unless it can stop the fall. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 3. Foc CLoup Level 1 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You create a 20-foot-radius Sphere of fog centered on a point within range. The Sphere is Heavily Obscured. It lasts for the duration or until a strong wind (such as one created by Gust of Wind) dis- perses it. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The fog's radius increases by 20 feet for each spell slot level above 1. FORBIDDANCE Level 6 Abjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: 10 minutes or Ritual Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (ruby dust worth 1,000+ GP) Duration: 1 day You create a ward against magical travel that pro- tects up to 40,000 square feet of floor space to a height of 30 feet above the floor. For the duration, creatures can't teleport into the area or use portals, such as those created by the Gate spell, to enter the area. The spell proofs the area against planar travel, \_ and therefore prevents creatures from accessing the yas area by way of the Astral Plane, the Ethereal Plane, In addition, the spell damages types of creatures e when you cast it. Choose one or slowing: Aberrations, Celestials, Ele- Indead. When a creature You can designate a password wh "Ou cast the spell. A creature that speaks the pas ord as it en- ters the area takes no damage from the spell. The spell's area can't overlap with the area of another Forbiddance spell. If you cast Forbiddance every day for 30 days in the same location, the spell lasts until it is dispelled, and the Material components are consumed on the last casting. FORCECAGE Level 7 Evocation (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 100 feet Components: V, S, M (ruby dust worth 1,500+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour An immobile, Invisible, Cube-shaped prison com- posed of magical force springs into existence around an area you choose within range. The prison can be a cage or a solid box, as you choose. A prison in the shape of a cage can be up to 20 feet on a side and is made from 1/2-inch diameter bars spaced 1/2 inch apart. A prison in the shape of a box can be up to 10 feet on a side, creating a solid barrier that prevents any matter from Passing through it and blocking any spells cast into or out from the area. When you cast the spell, any creature that is com- pletely inside the cage's area is trapped. Creatures only partially within the area, or those too large to fit inside it, are pushed away from the center of the area until they are completely outside it. A creature inside the cage can't leave it by non- magical means. If the creature tries to use teleporta- tion or interplanar travel to leave, it must first make a Charisma saving throw. On a successful save, the creature can use that magic to exit the cage. Ona failed save, the creature doesn't exit the cage and wastes the spell or effect. The cage also extends into the Ethereal Plane, blocking ethereal travel. This spell can't be dispelled by Dispel Magic. FORESIGHT Level 9 Divination (Bard, Druid, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a hummingbird feather) Duration: 8 hours You touch a willing creature and bestow a limited FounT Of MOONLIGHT Level 4 Evocation (Bard, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes A cool light wreathes your body for the duration, emitting Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 20 feet. Until the spell ends, you have Resistance to Radi- ant damage, and your melee attacks deal an extra 2d6 Radiant damage on a hit. In addition, immediately after you take damage from a creature you can see within 60 feet of your- self, you can take a Reaction to force the creature to make a Constitution saving throw. Ona failed save, the creature has the Blinded condition until the end of your next turn. # Freedom Of Movement Level 4 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a leather strap) Duration: 1 hour You touch a willing creature. For the duration, the target's movement is unaffected by Difficult Terrain, and spells and other magical effects can neither re- duce the target's Speed nor cause the target to have the Paralyzed or Restrained conditions. The target also has a Swim Speed equal to its Speed. In addition, the target can spend 5 feet of move- ment to automatically escape from nonmagical restraints, such as manacles or a creature imposing the Grappled condition on it. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 4. FRIENDS Enchantment Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 10 feet Components: S, M (some makeup) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You magically emanate a sense of friendship toward one creature you can see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the duration. The tar- get succeeds automatically if it isn't a Humanoid, if you're fighting it, or if you have cast this spell on it within the past 24 hours. ae ee 'GasEous ForM \_, Deere Me ------ o es P Il ends early if the target takes damage u make an attack roll, deal damage, or force a to make a saving throw. When the spell ends, the target knows it was Charmed by you. ee Level 3 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a bit of gauze) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour A willing creature you touch shape-shifts, along with everything it's wearing and carrying, into a misty cloud for the duration. The spell ends on the target if it drops to O Hit Points or if it takes a Magic action to end the spell on itself. While in this form, the target's only method of movement is a Fly Speed of 10 feet, and it can hover. The target can enter and occupy the space of another creature. The target has Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage; it has Immunity to the Prone condition; and it has Ad- vantage on Strength, Dexterity, and Constitution saving throws. The target can pass through narrow openings, but it treats liquids as though they were solid surfaces. The target can't talk or manipulate objects, and any objects it was carrying or holding can't be dropped, used, or otherwise interacted with. Fi- nally, the target can't attack or cast spells. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 3. GATE Level 9 Conjuration (Cleric, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth 5,000+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You conjure a portal linking an unoccupied space you can see within range to a precise location ona different plane of existence. The portal is a circular opening, which you can make 5 to 20 feet in diam- eter. You can orient the portal in any direction you choose. The portal lasts for the duration, and the portal's destination is visible through it. The portal has a front and a back on each plane where it appears. Travel through the portal is possi- ble only by moving through its front. Anything that does so is instantly transported to the other plane, j appearing in the unoccupied space nearest to the --- mM p portal. ---\_ 278 Orto tHe Baro casts Gare TO OPEN A PORTAL`\TO `{=tex}THE OUTLANDS. ar Deities and other planar rulers can prevent por- tals created by this spell from opening in their pres- ence or anywhere within their domains. When you cast this spell, you can speak the name of a specific creature (a pseudonym, title, or nick- name doesn't work). If that creature is on a plane other than the one you are on, the portal opens next to the named creature and transports it to the nearest unoccupied space on your side of the portal. You gain no special power over the creature, and it is free to act as the DM deems appropriate. It might leave, attack you, or help you. GEAS Level 5 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: 30 days You give a verbal command to a creature that you can see within range, ordering it to carry out some service or refrain from an action or a course of ac- tivity as you decide. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condi- tion for the duration. The target automatically suc- ceeds if it can't understand your command,