# Hinchel Of | | HALFLING Cherished and guided by gods who value life, home, and hearth, halflings gravitate toward bucolic ha- vens where family and community help shape their lives. That said, many halflings possess a brave and adventurous spirit that leads them on journeys of discovery, affording them the chance to explore a bigger world and make new friends along the way. Their size---similar to that of a human child---helps them pass through crowds unnoticed and slip through tight spaces. Anyone who has spent time around halflings, par- ticularly halfling adventurers, has likely witnessed the storied "luck of the halflings" in action. When a halfling is in mortal danger, an unseen force seems to intervene on the halfling's behalf. Many halflings believe in the power of luck, and they attribute their unusual gift to one or more of their benevolent gods, including Yondalla, Brandobaris, and Charma- laine. The same gift might contribute to their robust life spans (about 150 years). Halfling communities come in all varieties. For ev- ery sequestered shire tucked away in an unspoiled part of the world, there's a crime syndicate like the Boromar Clan in the Eberron setting or a territorial mob of halflings like those in the Dark Sun setting. Halflings who prefer to live underground are sometimes called strongheart halflings or stouts. Nomadic halflings, as well as those who live among humans and other tall folk, are sometimes called lightfoot halflings or tallfellows. HALFLING TRAITS Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Small (about 2-3 feet tall) Speed: 30 feet As a Halfling, you have these special traits. Brave. You have Advantage on saving throws you make to avoid or end the Frightened condition. Halfling Nimbleness. You can move through the space of any creature that is a size larger than you, but you can't stop in the same space. Luck. When you roll a 1 on the d20 of a D20 Test, you can reroll the die, and you must use the new roll. Naturally Stealthy. You can take the Hide action even when you are obscured only by a creature that is at least one size larger than you. P # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS { 193 194 HUMAN HUMAN TRAITS Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 4-7 feet tall) or Small (about 2-4 Found throughout the multiverse, humans are as varied as they are numerous, and they endeavor to achieve as much as they can in the years they are given. Their ambition and resourcefulness are com- feet tall), chosen when you select this species mended, respected, and feared on many worlds. Speed: 30 feet Humans are as diverse in appearance as the Asalnumanvoulhave these'snecialltraitst people of Earth, and they have many gods. Schol-; a Rives 2 = \_ Resourceful. You gain Heroic Inspiration when- ars dispute the origin of humanity, but one of the 3 Sele Les ever you finish a Long Rest. earliest known human gatherings is said to have iStallpulavoulecintpranclencyinione cIalllor occurred in Sigil, the torus-shaped city at the center Epos ' gain y SETOUE of the multiverse and the place where the Common Ve: ile. Y é Origin f f 7 language was born. From there, humans could have Gpcuscn cM eal ane nau ony oumcholce ss y (see chapter 5). Skilled is recommended. spread to every part of the multiverse, bringing the City of Doors' cosmopolitanism with them. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS Orc Ores trace their creation to Gruumsh, a powerful god who roamed the wide open spaces of the Mate- rial Plane. Gruumsh equipped his children with gifts to help them wander great plains, vast caverns, and churning seas and to face the monsters that lurk there. Even when they turn their devotion to other gods, orcs retain Gruumsh's gifts: endurance, determination, and the ability to see in darkness. Orcs are, on average, tall and broad. They have gray skin, ears that are sharply pointed, and prom- inent lower canines that resemble small tusks. Ore youths on some worlds are told about their ances- tors' great travels and travails. Inspired by those tales, many of those orcs wonder when Gruumsh will call on them to match the heroic deeds of old and if they will prove worthy of his favor. Other orcs are happy to leave old tales in the past and find their own way. Orc TRAITS Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 6-7 feet tall) Speed: 30 feet As an Ore, you have these special traits. Adrenaline Rush. You can take the Dash action as a Bonus Action. When you do so, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Proficiency Bonus. You can use this trait a number of times equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and you regain all ex- pended uses when you finish a Short or Long Rest. Darkvision, You have Darkvision with a range of 120 feet. Relentless Endurance. When you are reduced to 0 Hit Points but not killed outright, you can drop to 1 Hit Point instead. Once you use this trait, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. Se # Chthonic Tiefling AByssa TIEFLING # Infernal Tiefling TIEFLING Tieflings are either born in the Lower Planes or have fiendish ancestors who originated there. A tiefling (pronounced TEE-fling) is linked by blood to a devil, a demon, or some other Fiend. This con- nection to the Lower Planes is the tiefling's fiendish legacy, which comes with the promise of power yet has no effect on the tiefling's moral outlook. A tiefling chooses whether to embrace or lament their fiendish legacy. The three legacies are de- scribed below. ABYSSAL The entropy of the Abyss, the chaos of Pandemo- nium, and the despair of Carceri call to tieflings who have the abyssal legacy. Horns, fur, tusks, and peculiar scents are common physical features of such tieflings, most of whom have the blood of de- mons coursing through their veins. CHTHONIC Tieflings who have the chthonic legacy feel not only the tug of Carceri but also the greed of Gehenna and the gloom of Hades. Some of these tieflings look cadaverous. Others possess the unearthly beauty of a succubus, or they have physical features in common with a night hag, a yugoloth, or some other Neutral Evil fiendish ancestor. INFERNAL The infernal legacy connects Gehenna but also the Nine H battlefields of Acheron. Horn eyes, and a faint odor of sulfur or mon physical features of such t Ss whom trace their ancestry t ings not only to and the raging es, tails, golden noke are com- most of # Tiefling Traits Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 4-7 feet tall) or Small (about 3-4 feet tall), chosen when you select this species Speed: 30 feet Asa Tiefling, you have the following special traits. Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. Fiendish Legacy. You are the recipient of a legacy that grants you supernatural abilities. Choose a leg- acy from the Fiendish Legacies table. You gain the level 1 benefit of the chosen legacy. # Fiendish Legacies Legacy Level 1 Abyssal You have Resistance to Poison damage. You also know the Poison Spray cantrip. Chthonic You have Resistance to Necrotic damage. You also know the Chill Touch cantrip. Infernal You have Resistance to Fire damage. You also know the Fire Bolt cantrip. When you reach character levels 3 and 5, you learn a higher-level spell, as shown on the table. You always have that spell prepared. You can cast it once without a spell slot, and you regain the ability to cast it in that way when you finish a Long Rest. You can also cast the spell using any spell slots you have of the appropriate level. Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell- casting ability for the spells you cast with this trait (choose the ability when you select the legacy). Otherworldly Presence. You know the Thauma- turgy cantrip. When you cast it with this trait, the spell uses the same spellcasting ability you use for your Fiendish Legacy trait. Level 3 Level 5 Ray of Sickness Hold Person False Life Ray of Enfeeblement Hellish Rebuke; 4 Tue WeaTHERMAY-FOXGROVE TWINS, GENNIFER AND LAURIE, ALONG WITH THE INVESTIGATORS ALANIK Ray AND ARTHUR SEDGWICK, FIGHT TO ESCAPE THE HORRORS OF CASTLE RAVENLOFT. 4 } ' iz # Toutan Boros # Chapter 5 FEATS Sy feats, which are special features not tied to a "character class. A feat represents a talent or an area of expertise that gives a character special capabilities. It embodies training, experience, and abilities beyond what a class provides. The sections below explain the parts of a feat and list a variety of feat options separated into categories. Your background gives you a feat, and at certain levels, your class gives you the Ability Score Im- provement feat or the choice of another feat for which you qualify. By whatever means you acquire a feat, you can take it only once unless its description says otherwise. # T His Chapter Offers A Collection Of L # Feat Descriptions This chapter's feats are organized by category--- Origin, General, Fighting Style, or Epic Boon---and alphabetized in each category. All the feats are listed alphabetically in the Feat List table. If a feat can be taken more than once, an asterisk appears after its name in that table. # Parts Of A Feat The description of a feat contains the following parts, which are presented after the feat's name. Category. A feat is a member of a category, which is noted in the feat. If you're instructed to choose a feat from a specific category, such as the Origin category, that category must appear under the feat's name. If you're instructed to choose a feat and no category is specified, you can choose from any category. Prerequisite. To take a feat, you must meet any prerequisite in its description unless a feature al- lows you to take the feat without the prerequisite. If a prerequisite includes a class, you must have at least 1 level in that class to take the feat. Benefit. The benefits of a feat are detailed after any prerequisites are listed. If you have a feat, you gain its benefits. Repeatable. A feat can be taken only once unless its description states otherwise in a "Repeatable" subsection. Feat List Feat Ability Score Improvement\* Actor Alert Archery Athlete Blind Fighting Boon of Combat Prowess Boon of Dimensional Travel Boon of Energy Resistance Boon of Fate Boon of Fortitude Boon of Irresistible Offense Boon of Recovery Boon of Skill Boon of Speed Boon of Spell Recall Boon of the Night Spirit Boon of Truesight Charger Chef Crafter Crossbow Expert Crusher Defense Defensive Duelist Dual Wielder Dueling Durable Elemental Adept\* Fey-Touched Grappler Great Weapon Fighting Great Weapon Master Healer Category General General Origin Fighting Style General Fighting Style Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon Epic Boon General General Origin General General Fighting Style General General Fighting Style General General General General Fighting Style General Origin # CHAPTER \| FEATS 4 199 © CHAPTER \| FEATS Feat Heavily Armored Heavy Armor Master Inspiring Leader Interception Keen Mind Lightly Armored Lucky Mage Slayer Magic Initiate *Martial Weapon Training Medium Armor Master Moderately Armored Mounted Combatant Musician Observant Piercer Poisoner Polearm Master Protection Resilient Ritual Caster Savage Attacker Sentinel Shadow-Touched Sharpshooter Shield Master Skilled* Skill Expert Skulker Slasher Speedy Spell Sniper Category General General General Fighting Style General General Origin General Origin General General General General Origin General General General General Fighting Style General General Origin General General General General Origin General General General General General Category Feat Tavern Brawler Origin Telekinetic General Telepathic General Thrown Weapon Fighting Fighting Style Tough Origin Two-Weapon Fighting Fighting Style Unarmed Fighting Fighting Style War Caster General General Weapon Master \*This feat can be taken more than once. ORIGIN FEATS These feats are in the Origin category. ALERT Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. Initiative Proficiency. When you roll Initiative, you can add your Proficiency Bonus to the roll. Initiative Swap. Immediately after you roll Initiative, you can swap your Initiative with the Initiative of one willing ally in the same combat. You can't make this swap if you or the ally has the Incapaci- tated condition. CRAFTER Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. Tool Proficiency. You gain proficiency with three different Artisan's Tools of your choice from the Fast Crafting table. Discount. Whenever you buy a nonmagical item, you receive a 20 percent discount on it. Fast Crafting. When you finish a Long Rest, you can craft one piece of gear from the Fast Crafting table, provided you have the Artisan's Tools associ- ated with that item and have proficiency with those tools. The item lasts until you finish another Long Rest, at which point the item falls apart. --- Fast CRAFTING Artisan's Too!s Crafted Gear Carpenter's Tools Ladder, Torch Leatherworker's Tools Case, Pouch Mason's Tools Block and Tackle Potter's Tools Jug, Lamp Ball Bearings, Bucket, Caltrops, Grappling Hook, Iron Pot smith's Tools Bell, Shovel, Tinder Box Basket, Rope, Net, Tent Club, Greatclub, Quarterstaff Tinker's Tools Weaver's Tools Woodcarver's Tools HEALER Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. Battle Medic. If you have a Healer's Kit, you can expend one use of it and tend to a creature within 5 feet of yourself as a Utilize action. That creature can expend one of its Hit Point Dice, and you then roll that die. The creature regains a number of Hit Points equal to the roll plus your Proficiency Bonus. Healing Rerolls. Whenever you roll a die to deter- mine the number of Hit Points you restore with a spell or with this feat's Battle Medic benefit, you can reroll the die if it rolls a 1, and you must use the new roll. Lucky Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. Luck Points. You have a number of Luck Points equal to your Proficiency Bonus and can spend the points on the benefits below. You regain your ex- pended Luck Points when you finish a Long Rest. Advantage. When you roll a d20 for a D20 Test, you can spend 1 Luck Point to give yourself Advan- tage on the roll. Disadvantage. When a creature rolls a d20 for an attack roll against you, you can spend 1 Luck Point to impose Disadvantage on that roll. Macic INITIATE Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. Two Cantrips. You learn two cantrips of your choice from the Cleric, Druid, or Wizard spell list.: Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spellcast- A ing ability for this feat's spells (choose when you select this feat). \_--- Level 1 Spell. Choose a level 1 spell from the same list you selected for this feat's cantrips. You always have that spell prepared. You can cast it once with- out a spell slot, and you regain the ability to cast it in that way when you finish a Long Rest. You can also cast the spell using any spell slots you have. Spell Change. Whenever you gain a new level, you can replace one of the spells you chose for this feat with a different spell of the same level from the cho- sen spell list. Repeatable. You can take this feat more than once, but you must choose a different spell list each time. MUSICIAN Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. Instrument Training. You gain proficiency with three Musical Instruments of your choice. Encouraging Song. As you finish a Short or Long Rest, you can play a song on a Musical Instrument with which you have proficiency and give Heroic Inspiration to allies who hear the song. The number of allies you can affect in this way equals your Pro- ficiency Bonus. # Savage Attacker Origin Feat You've trained to deal particularly damaging strikes. Once per turn when you hit a target with a weapon, you can roll the weapon's damage dice twice and use either roll against the target. SKILLED Origin Feat You gain proficiency in any combination of three skills or tools of your choice. Repeatable. You can take this feat more than once. # CHAPTER \| FEATS 201 i --- i TAVERN BRAWLER Origin Feat You gain the following benefits. 3.t Enhanced Unarmed Strike. When you hit with your Unarmed Strike and deal damage, you can deal Bludgeoning damage equal to 1d4 plus your Strength modifier instead of the normal damage of \| an Unarmed Strike. Damage Rerolls. Whenever you roll a damage die for your Unarmed Strike, you can reroll the die if it \| \| rolls a 1, and you must use the new roll. \| Improvised Weaponry. You have proficiency with \| improvised weapons. f Push. When you hit a creature with an Unarmed tof Strike as part of the Attack action on your turn, you i can deal damage to the target and also push it 5 feet away from you. You can use this benefit only once per turn. Ha ToucH { Origin Feat Your Hit Point maximum increases by an amount } \| equal to twice your character level when you gain i this feat. Whenever you gain a character level thereafter, your Hit Point maximum increases by an additional 2 Hit Points. GENERAL FEATS These feats are in the General category. ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) Increase one ability score of your choice by 2, or increase two ability scores of your choice by 1. This feat can't increase an ability score above 20. Repeatable. You can take this feat more than once. ACTOR General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Charisma 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Impersonation. While you're disguised as a real or fictional person, you have Advantage on Charisma (Deception or Performance) checks to convince others that you are that person. Mimicry. You can mimic the sounds of other crea- tures, including speech. A creature that hears the mimicry must succeed on a Wisdom (Insight) check to determine the effect is faked (DC 8 plus your Charisma modifier and Proficiency Bonus). # CHAPTER \| FEATS ATHLETE General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength or Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Climb Speed. You gain a Climb Speed equal to your Speed. Hop Up. When you have the Prone condition, you can right yourself with only 5 feet of movement. Jumping. You can make a running Long or High Jump after moving only S feet. CHARGER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength or Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Improved Dash. When you take the Dash action, your Speed increases by 10 feet for that action. Charge Attack. If you move at least 10 feet ina straight line toward a target immediately before hit- ting it with a melee attack roll as part of the Attack action, choose one of the following effects: gain a 1d8 bonus to the attack's damage roll, or push the target up to 10 feet away if it is no more than one size larger than you. You can use this benefit only once on each of your turns. CHEF General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Constitution or Wisdom score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Cook's Utensils. You gain proficiency with Cook's Utensils if you don't already have it. Replenishing Meal. As part of a Short Rest, you can cook special food if you have ingredients and Cook's Utensils on hand. You can prepare enough of this food for a number of creatures equal to 4 plus your Proficiency Bonus. At the end of the Short Rest, any creature who eats the food and spends one or more Hit Dice to regain Hit Points regains an extra 1d8 Hit Points. Bolstering Treats. With 1 hour of work or when you finish a Long Rest, you can cook a number of treats equal to your Proficiency Bonus if you have ingredients and Cook's Utensils on hand. These spe- cial treats last 8 hours after being made. A creature can use a Bonus Action to eat one o! those treats to gain a number of Temporary {Hii Points equal to your Proficiency Bonus. CrossBow EXPERT General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Ignore Loading. You ignore the Loading property of the Hand Crossbow, Heavy Crossbow, and Light Crossbow (all called crossbows elsewhere in this feat). If you're holding one of them, you can loada piece of ammunition into it even if you lack a free hand. Firing in Melee. Being within S feet of an enemy doesn't impose Disadvantage on your attack rolls with crossbows. Dual Wielding. When you make the extra attack of the Light property, you can add your ability modifier to the damage of the extra attack if that at- tack is with a crossbow that has the Light property and you aren't already adding that modifier to the damage. CRUSHER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Constitution score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Push. Once per turn, when you hit a creature with an attack that deals Bludgeoning damage, you can move it 5 feet to an unoccupied space if the target is no more than one size larger than you. Enhanced Critical. When you score a Critical Hit that deals Bludgeoning damage to a creature, attack rolls against that creature have Advantage until the start of your next turn. DEFENSIVE DUELIST General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Parry. If you're holding a Finesse weapon and another creature hits you with a melee attack, you can take a Reaction to add your Proficiency Bonus to your Armor Class, potentially causing the attack to miss you. You gain this bonus to your AC against melee attacks until the start of your next turn. DUAL WIELDER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength or Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Enhanced Dual Wielding. When you take the At- tack action on your turn and attack with a weapon that has the Light property, you can make one extra attack as a Bonus Action later on the same turn with a different weapon, which must be a Melee weapon that lacks the Two-Handed property. You don't add your ability modifier to the extra attack's damage unless that modifier is negative. Quick Draw. You can draw or stow two weap- ons that lack the Two-Handed property when you would normally be able to draw or stow only one. DURABLE General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Constitution score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Defy Death. You have Advantage on Death Saving Throws. Speedy Recovery. As a Bonus Action, you can ex- pend one of your Hit Point Dice, roll the die, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to the roll. # Elemental Adept General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Spellcasting or Pact Magic Feature) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Energy Mastery. Choose one of the following dam- age types: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder. Spells you cast ignore Resistance to damage of the chosen type. In addition, when you roll damage for a spell you cast that deals damage of that type, you can treat any 1 on a damage die as a 2. Repeatable. You can take this feat more than once, but you must choose a different damage type each time for Energy Mastery. # CHAPTER \| FEATS # - 203 WME Ps en: a FEy-TOUCHED General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) Your exposure to the Feywild's magic grants you the following benefits. F Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20.: Fey Magic. Choose one level 1 spell from the Divi- nation or Enchantment school of magic. You always have that spell and the Misty Step spell prepared. You can cast each of these spells without expending a spell slot. Once you cast either spell in this way, you can't cast that spell in this way again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also cast these spells us- ing spell slots you have of the appropriate level. The spells' spellcasting ability is the ability increased by this feat. GRAPPLER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength or Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Punch and Grab. When you hit a creature with an Unarmed Strike as part of the Attack action on your turn, you can use both the Damage and the Grapple option. You can use this benefit only once per turn. Attack Advantage. You have Advantage on attack rolls against a creature Grappled by you. Fast Wrestler. Your Speed isn't halved when you move a creature Grappled by you if the creature is your size or smaller. GREAT WEAPON MASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Heavy Weapon Mastery. When you hit a creature with a weapon that has the Heavy property as part of the Attack action on your turn, you can cause the weapon to deal extra damage to the target. The extra damage equals your Proficiency Bonus. Hew. Immediately after you score a Critical Hit with a Melee weapon or reduce a creature to 0 Hit Points with one, you can make one attack with the same weapon as a Bonus Action. HEAVILY ARMORED General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Medium Armor Training) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Constitution or Strength score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Armor Training. You gain training with Heavy armor. HEAvy ARMOR MASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Heavy Armor Training) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Constitution or Strength score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Damage Reduction. When you're hit by an attack while you're wearing Heavy armor, any Bludgeon- ing, Piercing, and Slashing damage dealt to you by that attack is reduced by an amount equal to your Proficiency Bonus. INSPIRING LEADER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Wisdom or Charisma 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Wisdom or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Bolstering Performance. When you finish a Short or Long Rest, you can give an inspiring perfor- mance: a speech, song, or dance. When you do so, choose up to six allies (which can include yourself) within 30 feet of yourself who witness the perfor- mance. The chosen creatures each gain Temporary Hit Points equal to your character level plus the modifier of the ability you increased with this feat. 2 \$ 3 z E3 cs KEEN MIND General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Intelligence 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Lore Knowledge. Choose one of the following skills: Arcana, History, Investigation, Nature, or Religion. If you lack proficiency in the chosen skill, you gain proficiency in it, and if you already have proficiency in it, you gain Expertise in it. Quick Study. You can take the Study action as a Bonus Action. LIGHTLY ARMORED General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Armor Training. You gain training with Light ar- mor and Shields. MAGE SLAYER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Concentration Breaker. When you damage a creature that is concentrating, it has Disadvan- tage on the saving throw it makes to maintain Concentration. Guarded Mind. If you fail an Intelligence, a Wis- dom, or a Charisma saving throw, you can cause yourself to succeed instead. Once you use this ben- efit, you can't use it again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. MARTIAL WEAPON TRAINING General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Weapon Proficiency. You gain proficiency with Martial weapons. # Medium Armor Master General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Medium Armor Training) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase, Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, toa maximum of 20, Dexterous Wearer. While you're wearing Medium \| i } armor, you can add 3, rather than 2, to your AC if iy you have a Dexterity score of 16 or higher.! MODERATELY ARMORED General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Light Armor i} Training) i \| i} You gain the following benefits. Hi Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or \| Dexterity score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Armor Training. You gain training with Medium armor. \| Mountep CoMBATANT \| General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. \| Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength, \| Dexterity, or Wisdom score by 1, to a maximum of i 20. \| Mounted Strike. While mounted, you have Advan-\ tage on attack rolls against any unmounted crea- ture within 5 feet of your mount that is at least one size smaller than the mount. Leap Aside. If your mount is subjected to an effect that allows it to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, it instead takes no damage if it succeeds on the saving throw and only half dam- age if it fails. For your mount to gain this benefit, you must be riding it, and neither of you can have the Incapacitated condition. Veer. While mounted, you can force an attack that hits your mount to hit you instead if you don't have the Incapacitated condition. OBSERVANT General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Intelligence or Wisdom 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence or Wisdom score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Keen Observer. Choose one of the following skills: Insight, Investigation, or Perception. If you lack pro- ficiency with the chosen skill, you gain proficiency in it, and if you already have proficiency in it, you gain Expertise in it. Quick Search. You can take the Search action as a Bonus Action. # CHAPTER \| FEATS 205 PIERCER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity by 1, toa maximum of 20. Puncture. Once per turn, when you hit a creature with an attack that deals Piercing damage, you can reroll one of the attack's damage dice, and you must use the new roll.: Enhanced Critical. When you score a Critical Hit that deals Piercing damage to a creature, you can roll one additional damage die when determining the extra Piercing damage the target takes. POISONER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity or Intelligence score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Potent Poison. When you make a damage roll that deals Poison damage, it ignores Resistance to Poison damage. Brew Poison. You gain proficiency with the Poi- soner's Kit. With 1 hour of work using such a kit and expending 50 GP worth of materials, you can create a number of poison doses equal to your Proficiency Bonus. As a Bonus Action, you can apply a poison dose to a weapon or piece of ammunition. Once applied, the poison retains its potency for 1 minute or until you hit with the poisoned item, whichever is shorter. When a creature takes damage from the poisoned item, that creature must succeed on a Constitution saving throw (DC 8 plus the modifier of the ability increased by this feat and your Profi- ciency Bonus) or take 2d8 Poison damage and have the Poisoned condition until the end of your next turn. POLEARM MASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength or Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity or Strength score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Pole Strike. Immediately after you take the Attack action and attack with a Quarterstaff, a Spear, ora weapon that has the Heavy and Reach properties, you can use a Bonus Action to make a melee attack with the opposite end of the weapon. The weapon deals Bludgeoning damage, and the weapon's dam- age die for this attack is a d4. Reactive Strike. While you're holding a Quarter- staff, a Spear, or a weapon that has the Heavy and Reach properties, you can take a Reaction to make one melee attack against a creature that enters the reach you have with that weapon. RESILIENT General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Choose one ability in which you lack saving throw proficiency. Increase the cho- sen ability score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Saving Throw Proficiency. You gain saving throw proficiency with the chosen ability. RITUAL CASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+; Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Ritual Spells. Choose a number of level 1 spells equal to your Proficiency Bonus that have the Rit- ual tag. You always have those spells prepared, and you can cast them with any spell slots you have. The = spells' speli ing ability is the ability increased by this feat. 'Whenever your Proficiency Bonus in- creases thereafter, you can add an additional level 1 spell with the Ritual tag to the spells always pre- ared with this feature. Quick Ritual. With this benefit, you can cast a Ritual spell that you have prepared using its regular casting time rather than the extended time for a Rit- ual. Doing so doesn't require a spell slot. Once you cast the spell in this way, you can't use this benefit again until you finish a Long Rest. SENTINEL General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Strength or Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Guardian. Immediately after a creature within 5 feet of you takes the Disengage action or hits a tar- get other than you with an attack, you can make an Opportunity Attack against that creature. Halt. When you hit a creature with an Opportu- nity Attack, the creature's Speed becomes 0 for the rest of the current turn. SHADOW-TOUCHED General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) Your exposure to the Shadowfell's magic grants you the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Shadow Magic. Choose one level 1 spell from the Illusion or Necromancy school of magic. You always have that spell and the Invisibility spell prepared. You can cast each of these spells without expending a spell slot. Once you cast either spell in this way, you can't cast that spell in this way again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also cast these spells us- ing spell slots you have of the appropriate level. The spells' spellcasting ability is the ability increased by this feat. SHARPSHOOTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20, Bypass Cover. Your ranged attacks with weapons ignore Half Cover and Three-Quarters Cover. cane # Wayne Eng & Firing in Melee. Being within 5 feet of an enemy doesn't impose Disadvantage on your attack rolls with Ranged weapons. Long Shots. Attacking at long range doesn't im- pose Disadvantage on your attack rolls with Ranged weapons. SHIELD MASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Shield Training) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Shield Bash. If you attack a creature within 5 feet of you as part of the Attack action and hit with a Melee weapon, you can immediately bash the target with your Shield if it's equipped, forcing the target to make a Strength saving throw (DC 8 plus your Strength modifier and Proficiency Bonus). On a failed save, you either push the target 5 feet from you or cause it to have the Prone condition (your choice). You can use this benefit only once on each of your turns. Interpose Shield. If you're subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you can take a Reaction to take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw and are holding a Shield. ------ SKILL EXPERT General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, toa maximum of 20. Skill Proficiency. You gain proficiency in one skill of your choice. Expertise. Choose one skill in which you have pro- ficiency but lack Expertise. You gain Expertise with that skill. # 1 207 # CHAPTER \| FEATS ---\_ --- SKULKER; General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Dexterity 13+) You gain the following benefits.; Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Blindsight. You have Blindsight with a range of 10 feet. Fog of War. You exploit the distractions of battle, gaining Advantage on any Dexterity (Stealth) check you make as part of the Hide action during combat. Sniper. If you make an attack roll while hidden and the roll misses, making the attack roll doesn't reveal your location. SLASHER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Hamstring. Once per turn when you hit a creature with an attack that deals Slashing damage, you can reduce the Speed of that creature by 10 feet until the start of your next turn. Enhanced Critical. When you score a Critical Hit that deals Slashing damage to a creature, it has Disadvantage on attack rolls until the start of your next turn. SPEEDY General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Dexterity or Constitution 13+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Dexterity or Constitution score by 1, toa maximum of 20. Speed Increase. Your Speed increases by 10 feet. Dash over Difficult Terrain. When you take the Dash action on your turn, Difficult Terrain doesn't cost you extra movement for the rest of that turn. Agile Movement. Opportunity Attacks have Disad- vantage against you. SPELL SNIPER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Spellcasting or Pact Magic Feature) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Bypass Cover. Your attack rolls for spells ignore Half Cover and Three-Quarters Cover. Casting in Melee. Being within 5 feet of an enemy doesn't impose Disadvantage on your attack rolls with spells. Increased Range. When you cast a spell that has a range of at least 10 feet and requires you to make an attack roll, you can increase the spell's range by 60 feet. TELEKINETIC General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Minor Telekinesis. You learn the Mage Hand spell. You can cast it without Verbal or Somatic compo- nents, you can make the spectral hand Invisible, and its range increases by 30 feet when you cast it. The spell's spellcasting ability is the ability increased by this feat. Telekinetic Shove. As a Bonus Action, you can tele- kinetically shove one creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. When you do so, the target must succeed on a Strength saving throw (DC 8 plus the ability modifier of the score increased by this feat and your Proficiency Bonus) or be moved 5 feet to- ward or away from you. TELEPATHIC General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Telepathic Utterance. You can speak telepathically to any creature you can see within 60 feet of your- self. Your telepathic utterances are in a language you know, and the creature understands you only if it knows that language. Your communication doesn't give the creature the ability to respond to you telepathically, WAYNE ENCLAND waa = Detect Thoughts. You always have the Detect Thoughts spell prepared. You can cast it without a spell slot or spell components, and you must finish a Long Rest before you can cast it in this way again. You can also cast it using spell slots you have of the appropriate level. Your spellcasting ability for the spell is the ability increased by this feat. Se ee WAR CASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+, Spellcasting or Pact Magic Feature) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Concentration. You have Advantage on Consti- tution saving throws that you make to maintain Concentration. Reactive Spell. When a creature provokes an Op- portunity Attack from you by leaving your reach, you can take a Reaction to cast a spell at the crea- ture rather than making an Opportunity Attack. The spell must have a casting time of one action and must target only that creature. Somatic Components. You can perform the So- matic components of spells even when you have weapons or a Shield in one or both hands. WEAPON MASTER General Feat (Prerequisite: Level 4+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, to a maximum of 20. Mastery Property. Your training with weapons al- lows you to use the mastery property of one kind of Simple or Martial weapon of your choice, provided you have proficiency with it. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kind of weapon to another eligible kind. FIGHTING STYLE FEATS These feats are in the Fighting Style category. ARCHERY Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) You gain a +2 bonus to attack rolls you make with Ranged weapons. F ------------------ ee BLIND FIGHTING Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) You have Blindsight with a range of 10 feet. Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) While you're wearing Light, Medium, or Heavy ar- mor, you gain a +1 bonus to Armor Class. --------- DUELING Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) When you're holding a Melee weapon in one hand and no other weapons, you gain a +2 bonus to dam- age rolls with that weapon.