# Lightning Arrow Level 3 Transmutation (Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting or missing a target with a ranged attack using a weapon Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous As your attack hits or misses the target, the weapon or ammunition you're using transforms into a lightning bolt. Instead of taking any damage or other effects from the attack, the target takes 4d8 Lightning damage on a hit or half as much damage ona miss. Each creature within 10 feet of the target then makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 2d8 Lightning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. The weapon or ammunition then returns to its normal form. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage for both effects of the spell increases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 3. LIGHTNING BOLT Level 3 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a bit of fur and a crystal rod) Duration: Instantaneous A stroke of lightning forming a 100-foot-long, 5-foot-wide Line blasts out from you in a direction you choose. Each creature in the Line makes a Dex- terity saving throw, taking 8d6 Lightning damage ona failed save or half as much damage on a suc- cessful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 3. LocaTE ANIMALS OR PLANTS Level 2 Divination (Bard, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (fur from a bloodhound) Duration: Instantaneous Describe or name a specific kind of Beast, Plant creature, or nonmagical plant. You learn the direc- tion and distance to the closest creature or plant of that kind within 5 miles, if any are present. LocaTE CREATURE Level 4 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (fur from a bloodhound) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour Describe or name a creature that is familiar to you. You sense the direction to the creature's location if that creature is within 1,000 feet of you. If the creature is moving, you know the direction of its movement. The spell can locate a specific creature known to you or the nearest creature of a specific kind (such as a human or a unicorn) if you have seen such a creature up close---within 30 feet---at least once. If the creature you described or named is in a dif- ferent form, such as under the effects of a Flesh to Stone or Polymorph spell, this spe!l doesn't locate the creature, This spell can't locate a creature if any thickness of lead blocks a direct path between you and the creature, LOCATE OvjECT Level 2 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Paladin, Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a forked twig) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes Describe or name an object that is familiar to you. You sense the direction to the object's location if that object is within 1,000 feet of you. If the object is in motion, you know the direction of its movement. The spell can locate a specific object known to you if you have seen it up close---within 30 feet---at least once. Alternatively, the spell can locate the nearest object of a particular kind, such as a certain kind of apparel, jewelry, furniture, tool, or weapon. This spell can't locate an object if any thickness of lead blocks a direct path between you and the object. LONGSTRIDER Level 1 Transmutation (Bard, Druid, Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a pinch of dirt) Duration: 1 hour You touch a creature. The target's Speed increases by 10 feet until the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. MaGE ARMOR Level 1 Abjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a piece of cured leather) Duration: 8 hours You touch a willing creature who isn't wearing armor. Until the spell ends, the target's base AC be- comes 13 plus its Dexterity modifier. The spell ends early if the target dons armor. tion Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Time: Action « ents: V, S Duration: 1 minute A spectral, floating hand appears at a point you choose within range. The hand lasts for the dura- tion. The hand vanishes if it is ever more than 30 feet away from you or if you cast this spell again. When you cast the spell, you can use the hand to manipulate an object, open an unlocked door or container, stow or retrieve an item from an open container, or pour the contents out of a vial. Asa Magic action on your later turns, you can control the hand thus again. As part of that action, you can move the hand up to 30 feet. The hand can't attack, activate magic items, or carry more than 10 pounds. Macic CIRCLE Level 3 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 10 feet Components: V, S, M (salt and powdered silver worth 100+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: 1 hour You create a 10-foot-radius, 20-foot-tall Cylinder of magical energy centered ona point on the ground that you can see within range. Glowing runes ap- pear wherever the Cylinder intersects with the floor or other surface. Choose one or more of the following types of creatures: Celestials, Elementals, Fey, Fiends, or Undead. The circle affects a creature of the chosen type in the following ways: - The creature can't willingly enter the Cylinder by nonmagical means. If the creature tries to use teleportation or interplanar travel to do so, it must first succeed on a Charisma saving throw. - The creature has Disadvantage on attack rolls against targets within the Cylinder. - Targets within the Cylinder can't be possessed by or gain the Charmed or Frightened condition from the creature. Each time you cast this spell, you can cause its magic to operate in the reverse direction, prevent- ing a creature of the specified type from leaving the Cylinder and protecting targets outside it. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The duration in- creases by 1 hour for each spell slot level above 3. € ARMOR A wuman Wi2ard FENDS OFF PERIL WITH MAG ANO THE UNERRING BOLTS OF MAGic MissiLe MaGIc JAR Level 6 Necromancy (Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a gem, crystal, or reliquary worth 500+ GP) Duration: Until dispelled Your body falls into a catatonic state as your soul leaves it and enters the container you used for the spell's Material component. While your soul inhab- its the container, you are aware of your surround- ings as if you were in the container's space. You can't move or take Reactions. The only action you can take is to project your soul up to 100 feet out of the container, either returning to your living body (and ending the spell) or attempting to possess a Humanoid's body. You can attempt to possess any Humanoid within 100 feet of you that you can see (creatures warded by a Protection from Evil and Good or Magic Circle spell can't be possessed). The target makes a Cha- risma saving throw. On a failed save, your soul en- ters the target's body, and the target's soul becomes trapped in the container. On a successful save, the | SPELLS target resists your efforts to possess it, and you can't attempt to possess it again for 24 hours. Once you possess a creature's body, you control it. Your Hit Points, Hit Point Dice, Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Speed, and senses are replaced by the creature's. You otherwise keep your game statistics. Meanwhile, the possessed creature's soul can per- ceive from the container using its own senses, but it can't move and it is Incapacitated. While possessing a body, you can take a Magic ac- tion to return from the host body to the container if it is within 100 feet of you, returning the host crea- ture's soul to its body. If the host body dies while you're in it, the creature dies, and you make a Cha- risma saving throw against your own spellcasting DC. Ona success, you return to the container if it is within 100 feet of you. Otherwise, you die. If the container is destroyed or the spell ends, your soul returns to your body. If your body is more than 100 feet away from you or if your body is dead, you die. If another creature's soul is in the container when it is destroyed, the creature's soul returns to its body if the body is alive and within 100 feet. Otherwise, that creature dies. When the spell ends, the container is destroyed. AARON \| RILEY Macic M:5SILE Level 1 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V,S Duration: Instantaneous You create three glowing darts of magical force. Each dart strikes a creature of your choice that you can see within range. A dart deals 1d4 + 1 Force damage to its target. The darts all strike simultaneously, and you can direct them to hit one creature or several. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The spell creates one more dart for each spell slot level above 1. Macic MouTH Level 2 Illusion (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (jade dust worth 10+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled You implant a message within an object in range---a message that is uttered when a trigger condition is met. Choose an object that you can see and that isn't being worn or carried by another creature. Then speak the message, which must be 25 words or fewer, though it can be delivered over as long as 10 minutes. Finally, determine the circumstance that will trigger the spell to deliver your message. When that trigger occurs, a magical mouth ap- pears on the object and recites the message in your voice and at the same volume you spoke. If the ob- ject you chose has a mouth or something that looks like a mouth (for example, the mouth of a statue), the magical mouth appears there, so the words ap- pear to come from the object's mouth. When you cast this spell, you can have the spell end after it delivers its message, or it can remain and repeat its message whenever the trigger occurs. The trigger can be as general or as detailed as you like, though it must be based on visual or audible conditions that occur within 30 feet of the object. For example, you could instruct the mouth to speak when any creature moves within 30 feet of the ob- ject or when a silver bell rings within 30 feet of it. Macic WEAPON Level 2 Transmutation (Paladin, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour You touch a nonmagical weapon. Until the spell ends, that weapon becomes a magic weapon with a +1 bonus to attack rolls and damage rolls. The spell ends early if you cast it again. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The bonus in- creases to +2 with a level 3-5 spell slot. The bonus increases to +3 with a level 6+ spell slot. Mayor IMAGE Level 3 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create the image of an object, a creature, or some other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 20-foot Cube. The image appears at a spot that you can see within range and lasts for the du- ration. It seems real, including sounds, smells, and temperature appropriate to the thing depicted, but it can't deal damage or cause conditions. If you are within range of the illusion, you can take a Magic action to cause the image to move to any other spot within range. As the image changes location, you can alter its appearance so that its movements appear natural for the image. For exam- ple, if you create an image of a creature and move it, you can alter the image so that it appears to be walking. Similarly, you can cause the illusion to make different sounds at different times, even mak- ing it carry on a conversation, for example. Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an illusion, for things can pass through it. A crea- ture that takes a Study action to examine the image can determine that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature can see through the image, and its other sensory qualities become faint to the creature. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The spell lasts until dispelled, without requiring Concentration, if cast with a level 4+ spell slot. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS fa 95 296 1 Mass Cure WOUNDS Level 5 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A wave of healing energy washes out from a point you can see within range. Choose up to six crea- tures in a 30-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point. Each target regains Hit Points equal to 5d8 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 5. MASs HEAL Level 9 Abjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A flood of healing energy flows from you into creatures around you. You restore up to 700 Hit Points, divided as you choose among any number of creatures that you can see within range. Creatures healed by this spell also have the Blinded, Deafened, and Poisoned conditions removed from them. Mass HEALING WorD Level 3 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous Up to six creatures of your choice that you can see within range regain Hit Points equal to 2d4 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The healing in- creases by 1d4 for each spell slot level above 3. MASS SUGGESTION Level 6 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, M (a snake's tongue) Duration: 24 hours You suggest a course of activity---described in no more than 25 words---to twelve or fewer crea- tures you can see within range that can hear and # CHAPTER \| SPELLS understand you. The suggestion must sound achiey- able and not involve anything that would obviously deal damage to any of the targets or their allies. For example, you could say, "Walk to the village down that road, and help the villagers there harvest crops until sunset." Or you could say, "Now is not the time for violence. Drop your weapons, and dance! Stop in an hour." Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the dura- tion or until you or your allies deal damage to the target. Each Charmed target pursues the suggestion to the best of its ability. The suggested activity can continue for the entire duration, but if the sug- gested activity can be completed in a shorter time, the spell ends for a target upon completing it. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The duration is longer with a spell slot of level 7 (10 days), 8 (30 days), or 9 (366 days). MAZE Level 8 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You banish a creature that you can see within range into a labyrinthine demiplane. The target remains there for the duration or until it escapes the maze. The target can take a Study action to try to es- cape. When it does so, it makes a DC 20 Intelligence (Investigation) check. If it succeeds, it escapes, and the spell ends. When the spell ends, the target reappears in the space it left or, if that space is occupied, in the near- est unoccupied space. MELD INTO STONE Level 3 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: 8 hours You step into a stone object or surface large enough to fully contain your body, merging yourself and your equipment with the stone for the duration. You must touch the stone to do so. Nothing of your presence remains visible or otherwise detectable by nonmagical senses, While merged with the sto u can't see what occurs outside it, and any Wisdeii (Perception) checks you make to hear sou'i:'\* osttside it are made with Disadvantage. You remain aware of the pas- sage of time and can cast spells on yourself while merged in the stone. You can use 5 feet of move- ment to leave the stone where you entered it, which ends the spell. You otherwise can't move. Minor physical damage to the stone doesn't harm you, but its partial destruction or a change in its shape (to the extent that you no longer fit within it) expels you and deals 6d6 Force damage to you. The stone's complete destruction (or transmutation into a different substance) expels you and deals 50 Force damage to you. If expelled, you move into an unoc- cupied space closest to where you first entered and have the Prone condition. MELF's AcID ARROW Level 2 Evocation (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (powdered rhubarb leaf) Duration: Instantaneous A shimmering green arrow streaks toward a target within rar nd bursts in a spray of acid. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target takes 4d4 Acid damage and 2d4 Acid damage at the end of its next turn. On a miss, the arrow splashes the target with acid for half as much of the initial damage only. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage (both initial and later) increases by 1d4 for each spell slot level above 2. MENDING Transmutation Cantrip (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (two lodestones) Duration: Instantaneous This spell repairs a single break or tear in an object you touch, such as a broken chain link, two halves of a broken key, a torn cloak, or a leaking wineskin. As long as the break or tear is no larger than 1 foot in any dimension, you mend it, leaving no trace of the former damage. This spell can physically repair a magic item, but it can't restore magic to such an object. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 297 298 MESSAGE Transmutation Cantrip (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: S, M (a copper wire) Duration: 1 round You point toward a creature within range and whisper a message. The target (and only the target) hears the message and can reply in a whisper that only you can hear.; You can cast this spell through solid objects if you are familiar with the target and know it is beyond the barrier. Magical silence; 1 foot of stone, metal, or wood; or a thin sheet of lead blocks the spell. METEOR SWARM Level 9 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 1 mile Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Blazing orbs of fire plummet to the ground at four different points you can see within range. Each creature in a 40-foot-radius Sphere centered on each of those points makes a Dexterity saving throw. A creature takes 20d6 Fire damage and 20d6 Bludgeoning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature in the area of more than one fiery Sphere is affected only once. A nonmagical object that isn't being worn or car- ried also takes the damage if it's in the spell's area, and the object starts burning if it's flammable. MIND BLANK Level 8 Abjuration (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: 24 hours Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch has Immunity to Psychic damage and the Charmed condition. The target is also unaffected by anything that would sense its emotions or alignment, read its thoughts, or magically detect its location, and no spell---not even Wish---can gather information about the target, observe it remotely, or control its mind. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS # Mind Sliver Enchantment Cantrip (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: 1 round You try to temporarily sliver the mind of one crea- ture you can see within range. The target must succeed on an Intelligence saving throw or take 1d6 Psychic damage and subtract 1d4 from the next sav- ing throw it makes before the end of your next turn, Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d6 when you reach levels 5 (2d6), 11 (3d6), and 17 (4d6). MIND SPIKE Level 2 Divination (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You drive a spike of psionic energy into the mind of one creature you can see within range. The target makes a Wisdom saving throw, taking 3d8 Psychic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. On a failed save, you also always know the target's location until the spell ends, but only while the two of you are on the same plane of existence. While you have this knowledge, the target can't become hidden from you, and if it has the Invisible condition, it gains no benefit from that condition against you. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 2. MINorR ILLUSION Illusion Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: S, M (a bit of fleece) Duration: 1 minute You create a sound or an image of an object within range that lasts for the duration. See the descrip- tions below for the effects of each. The illusion ends if you cast this spell again. If a creature takes a Study action to examine the sound or image, the creature can determine that it is an illusion with a successfut intelligence (Investi- gation) check against your spei! save DC. If a crea- ture discerns the illusion for v./.3¢ it is, the illusion becomes faint to the creature \_--- a Sound. If you create a sound, its volume can range from a whisper to a scream. It can be your voice, someone else's voice, a lion's roar, a beating of drums, or any other sound you choose. The sound continues unabated throughout the duration, or you can make discrete sounds at different times before the spell ends. Image. If you create an image of an object---such as a chair, muddy footprints, or a small chest---it must be no larger than a 5-foot Cube. The image can't create sound, light, smell, or any other sensory effect. Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an illusion, since things can pass through it. MIRAGE ARCANE Level 7 Illusion (Bard, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: Sight Components: V, Ss. Duration: 10 days You make terrain in an area up to \| mile square look, sound, smell, and even feel like some other sort of terrain. Open fields or a road could be made to resemble a swamp, hill, crevasse, or some other rough or impassable terrain. A pond can be made to seem like a grassy meadow, a precipice like a gentle slope, or a rock-strewn gully like a wide and smooth road. Similarly, you can alter the appearance of struc- tures or add them where none are present. The spell doesn't disguise, conceal, or add creatures. The illusion includes audible, visual, tactile, and olfactory elements, so it can turn clear ground into Difficult Terrain (or vice versa) or otherwise impede movement through the area. Any piece of the illu- sory terrain (such as a rock or stick) that is removed from the spell's area disappears immediately. Creatures with Truesight can see through the illu- sion to the terrain's true form; however, all other el- ements of the illusion remain, so while the creature is aware of the illusion's presence, the creature can still physically interact with the illusion. MIRROR IMAGE Level 2 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: 1 minute Three illusory \<Juplicates of yourself appear in your space. Until the spell ends, the duplicates move with you and mimic your actions, shifting position so it's impossible to track which image is real. Each time a creature hits you with an attack roll during the spell's duration, roll a d6 for each of your remaining duplicates. If any of the d6s rolls a3 or higher, one of the duplicates is hit instead of you, and the duplicate is destroyed. The duplicates other- wise ignore all other damage and effects. The spell ends when all three duplicates are destroyed. A creature is unaffected by this spell if it has the Blinded condition, Blindsight, or Truesight. MISLEAD Level 5 Illusion (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You gain the Invisible condition at the same time that an illusory double of you appears where you are standing. The double lasts for the duration, but the invisibility ends immediately after you make an attack roll, deal damage, or cast a spell. As a Magic action, you can move the illusory double up to twice your Speed and make it gesture, speak, and behave in whatever way you choose. It is intangible and invulnerable. You can see through its eyes and hear through its ears as if you were located where it is. Misty STEP Level 2 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Instantaneous Briefly surrounded by silvery mist, you teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Mopiry MEMORY Level 5 Enchantment (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You attempt to reshape another creature's mem- ories. One creature that you can see within range makes a Wisdom saving throw. If you are fighting the creature, it has Advantage on the save. Ona failed save, the target has the Charmed condition for the duration. While Charmed in this way, the target also has the Incapacitated condition and is unaware of its surroundings, though it can hear CHAPTER7\|SPELLS 299 (im 390 you. If it takes any damage or is targeted by another spell, this spell ends, and no memories are modified. While this charm lasts, you can affect the target's memory of an event that it experienced within the last 24 hours and that lasted no more than 10 min- utes. You can permanently eliminate all memory of the event, allow the target to recall the event with perfect clarity, change its memory of the event's de- tails, or create a memory of some other event. You must speak to the target to describe how its memories are affected, and it must be able to under- stand your language for the modified memories to take root. Its mind fills in any gaps in the details of your description. If the spell ends before you finish describing the modified memories, the creature's memory isn't altered. Otherwise, the modified mem- ories take hold when the spell ends. A modified memory doesn't necessarily affect how a creature behaves, particularly if the mem- ory contradicts the creature's natural inclinations, alignment, or beliefs. An illogical modified memory, such as a false memory of how much the creature enjoyed swimming in acid, is dismissed as a bad dream. The DM might deem a modified memory too nonsensical to affect a creature. A Remove Curse or Greater Restoration spell cast on the target restores the creature's true memory. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can alter the target's memories of an event that took place up to 7 days ago (level 6 spell slot), 30 days ago (level 7 spell slot), 365 days ago (level 8 spell slot), or any time in the creature's past (level 9 spell slot). MOONBEAM Level 2 Evocation (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a moonseed leaf) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A silvery beam of pale light shines down in a 5-foot-radius, 40-foot-high Cylinder centered ona point within range. Until the spell ends, Dim Light fills the Cylinder, and you can take a Magic action on later turns to move the Cylinder up to 60 feet. When the Cylinder appears, each creature in it makes a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 2d10 Radiant damage, and if the creature is shape-shifted (as a result of the Poly- morph spell, for example), it reverts to its true form and can't shape-shift until it leaves the Cylinder. On a successful save, a creature takes half as much damage only. A creature also makes this save when the spell's area moves into its space and when it # CHAPTER \| SPELLS enters the spell's area or ends its turn there. A crea- ture makes this save only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 2. MoORDENKAINEN'S FAITHFUL HounpD Level 4 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a silver whistle) Duration: 8 hours You conjure a phantom watchdog in an unoccupied space that you can see within range. The hound remains for the duration or until the two of you are more than 300 feet apart from each other. No one but you can see the hound, and it is in- tangible and invulnerable. When a Small or larger creature comes within 30 feet of it without first speaking the password that you specify when you cast this spell, the hound starts barking loudly. The hound has Truesight with a range of 30 feet. At the start of each of your turns, the hound at- tempts to bite one enemy within S feet of it. That enemy must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or take 4d8 Force damage. On your later turns, you can take a Magic action to move the hound up to 30 feet. MORDENKAINEN'S MAGNIFICENT MANSION Level 7 Conjuration (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 300 feet Components: V, S, M (a miniature door worth 15+ GP) Duration: 24 hours You conjure a shimmering door in range that lasts for the duration. The door leads to an extradimen- sional dwelling and is 5 feet wide and 10 feet tall. You and any creature you designate when you cast the spell can enter the extradimensional dwelling as long as the door remains open. You can open or close it (no action required) if you are within 30 feet of it. While closed, the door is imperceptible, Beyond the door is a magnificent foyer with numerous chambers beyond. The dwelling's atmo- sphere is clean, fresh, and warm. You can create any floor plan you like for the dwelling, but it can't exceed 50 contiguous 10-foot Cubes. The place is furnished and decorated as you choose. It contains sufficient food to serve a nine- course banquet for up to 100 people. Furnishings and other objects created by this spell dissipate into smoke if removed from it. gy THe WizaRO MORDENKAINEN WELCOMES GUESTS TO HIS MAGICAL DWELLING, MorOENKAINEN'S MAGNIFICENT MANSION. A staff of 100 near-transparent servants attends all who enter. You determine the appearance of these servants and their attire. They are invulner- able and obey your commands. Each servant can perform tasks that a human could perform, but they can't attack or take any action that would directly harm another creature. Thus the servants can fetch things, clean, mend, fold clothes, light fires, serve food, pour wine, and so on. The servants can't leave the dwelling. When the spell ends, any creatures or objects left inside the extradimensional space are expelled into the unoccupied spaces nearest to the entrance. MORDENKAINEN'S PRIVATE SANCTUM Level 4 Abjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a thin sheet of lead) Duration: 24 hours You make an area within range magically secure. The area is a Cube that can be as small as 5 feet to as large as 100 feet on each side. The spell lasts for the duration. When you cast the spell, you decide what sort of security the spell provides, choosing any of the fol- lowing properties: - Sound can't pass through the barrier at the edge of the warded area. - The barrier of the warded area appears dark and foggy, preventing vision (including Darkvision) through it. - Sensors created by Divination spells can't appear inside the protected area or pass through the bar- rier at its perimeter. - Creatures in the area can't be targeted by Divina- tion spells. - Nothing can teleport into or out of the warded area. - Planar travel is blocked within the warded area. Casting this spell on the same spot every day for 365 days makes the spell last until dispelled. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can increase the size of the Cube by 100 feet for each spell slot level above 4. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS gor MorRDENKAINEN'S SWORD Level 7 Evocation (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a miniature sword worth 250+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a spectral sword that hovers within range. It lasts for the duration. When the sword appears, you make a melee spell attack against a target within 5 feet of the sword. On a hit, the target takes Force damage equal to 4d12 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. On your later turns, you can take a Bonus Action to move the sword up to 30 feet to a spot you can see and repeat the attack against the same target or a different one. MovVE EARTH Level 6 Transmutation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a miniature shovel) Duration: Concentration, up to 2 hours Choose an area of terrain no larger than 40 feet on a side within range. You can reshape dirt, sand, or clay in the area in any manner you choose for the duration. You can raise or lower the area's eleva- tion, create or fill in a trench, erect or flatten a wall, or form a pillar. The extent of any such changes can't exceed half the area's largest dimension. For example, if you affect a 40-foot square, you can create a pillar up to 20 feet high, raise or lower the square's elevation by up to 20 feet, dig a trench up to 20 feet deep, and so on. It takes 10 minutes for these changes to complete. Because the terrain's transformation occurs slowly, creatures in the area can't usually be trapped or injured by the ground's movement. At the end of every 10 minutes you spend concen- trating on the spell, you can choose a new area of terrain to affect within range. This spell can't manipulate natural stone or stone construction. Rocks and structures shift to accom- modate the new terrain. If the way you shape the terrain would make a structure unstable, it might collapse. Similarly, this spell doesn't directly affect plant growth. The moved earth carries any plants along with it. 302 \| CHAPTER \| SPELLS NONDETECTION Level 3 Abjuration (Bard, Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a pinch of diamond dust worth 25+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: 8 hours For the duration, you hide a target that you touch from Divination spells. The target can be a willing creature, or it can be a place or an object no larger than 10 feet in any dimension. The target can't be targeted by any Divination spell or perceived through magical scrying sensors. NysTuL's Macic AuRA Level 2 Illusion (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a small square of silk) Duration: 24 hours With a touch, you place an illusion on a willing creature or an object that isn't being worn or car- ried. A creature gains the Mask effect below, and an object gains the False Aura effect below. The effect lasts for the duration. If you cast the spell on the same target every day for 30 days, the illusion lasts until dispelled. Mask (Creature). Choose a creature type other than the target's actual type. Spells and other magi- cal effects treat the target as if it were a creature of the chosen type. False Aura (Object). You change the way the target appears to spells and magical effects that detect magical auras, such as Detect Magic. You can make anonmagical object appear magical, make a magic item appear nonmagical, or change the object's aura so that it appears to belong to a school of magic you choose. OTILUKE'S FREEZING SPHERE Level 6 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 300 feet Components: V, S, M (a miniature crystal sphere) Duration: Instantaneous A frigid globe streaks from you to a point of your choice within range, where it explodes in a 60-foot-radius Sphere. Each creature in that area makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 10d6 Cold damage on failed save o:!:aif as much damage on a successful one. \_--- If the glove strikes a body of water, it freezes the water to a depth of 6 inches over an area 30 feet square. This ice lasts for 1 minute. Creatures that were swimming on the surface of frozen water are trapped in the ice and have the Restrained condi- tion. A trapped creature can take an action to make a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC to break free. You can refrain from firing the globe after com- pleting the spell's casting. If you do so, a globe about the size of a sling bullet, cool to the touch, appears in your hand. At any time, you or a creature you give the globe to can throw the globe (to a range of 40 feet) or hurl it with a sling (to the sling's normal range). It shatters on impact, with the same effect as a normal casting of the spell. You can also set the globe down without shattering it. After 1 minute, if the globe hasn't already shattered, it explodes. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 6. OTILUKE'S RESILIENT SPHERE Level 4 Abjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a glass sphere) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A shimmering sphere encloses a Large or smaller creature or object within range. An unwilling crea- ture must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or be enclosed for the duration. Nothing---not physical objects, energy, or other spell effects---can pass through the barrier, in or out, though a creature in the sphere can breathe there. The sphere is immune to all damage, and a creature or object inside can't be damaged by attacks or ef- fects originating from outside, nor can a creature inside the sphere damage anything outside it. The sphere is weightless and just large enough to contain the creature or object inside. An enclosed creature can take an action to push against the sphere's walls and thus roll the sphere at up to half the creature's Speed. Similarly, the globe can be picked up and moved by other creatures. A Disintegrate spell targeting the globe destroys it without harming anything inside. Orro's IRRESISTIBLE DANCE Level 6 Enchantment (Bard, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute One creature that you can see within range must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a successful save, the target dances comically until the end of its next turn, during which it must spend all its movement to dance in place. Ona failed save, the target has the Charmed con- dition for the duration. While Charmed, the target dances comically, must use all its movement to dance in place, and has Disadvantage on Dexterity saving throws and attack rolls, and other creatures have Advantage on attack rolls against it. On each of its turns, the target can take an action to collect itself and repeat the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. PASSWALL Level 5 Transmutation (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a pinch of sesame seeds) Duration: 1 hour A passage appears at a point that you can see ona wooden, plaster, or stone surface (such as a wall, ceiling, or floor) within range and lasts for the dura- tion. You choose the opening's dimensions: up to 5 feet wide, 8 feet tall, and 20 feet deep. The passage creates no instability in a structure surrounding it. When the opening disappears, any creatures or objects still in the passage created by the spell are safely ejected to an unoccupied space nearest to the surface on which you cast the spell. # Pass Without Trace Level 2 Abjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (ashes from burned mistletoe) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You radiate a concealing aura in a 30-foot Emana- tion for the duration. While in the aura, you and each creature you choose have a +10 bonus to Dex- terity (Stealth) checks and leave no tracks.