# Evyn Fong CorE BARD TRAITS Primary Ability Hit Point Die Charisma D8 per Bard level Saving Throw Dexterity and Charisma Proficiencies Skill Proficiencies Choose any 3 skills (see chapter 1) Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons Tool Proficiencies Choose 3 Musical Instruments (see chapter 6) Light armor Choose A or B: (A) Leather Armor, 2 Daggers, Musical Instrument of your choice, Entertainer's Pack, and 19 GP; or (B) 90 GP Armor Training Starting Equipment Tr NVOKING MAGIC THROUGH MUSIC, DANCE, | and verse, Bards are expert at inspiring others, J soothing hurts, disheartening foes, and creat- ing illusions. Bards believe the multiverse was spo- ken into existence and that remnants of its Words of Creation still resound and glimmer on every plane of existence. Bardic magic attempts to harness those words, which transcend any language. Anything can inspire a new song or tale, so Bards are fascinated by almost everything. They become masters of many things, including performing mu- sic, working magic, and making jests. A Bard's life is spent traveling, gathering lore, tell- ing stories, and living on the gratitude of audiences, much like any other entertainer. But Bards' depth of knowledge and mastery of magic sets them apart. # Becoming A Bard... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER + Gain all the traits in the Core Bard Traits table. - Gain the Bard's level 1 features, which are listed in the Bard Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER Gain the following traits from the Core Bard Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency in one skill of your choice, proficiency with one Musical In- strument of your choice, and training with Light armor. - Gain the Bard's level 1 features, which are listed in the Bard Features table. See the multiclassing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. # Bard Class Features As a Bard, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Bard levels. These fea- tures are listed in the Bard Features table. LeveL 1: BARDIC INSPIRATION You can supernaturally inspire others through words, music, or dance. This inspiration is repre- sented by your Bardic Inspiration die, which is a d6. Using Bardic Inspiration. As a Bonus Action, you can inspire another creature within 60 feet of your- self who can see or hear you. That creature gains one of your Bardic Inspiration dice. A creature can have only one Bardic Inspiration die at a time. Once within the next hour when the creature fails a D20 Test, the creature can roll the Bardic Inspira- tion die and add the number rolled to the d20, po- tentially turning the failure into a success. A Bardic Inspiration die is expended when it's rolled. Number of Uses. You can confer a Bardic Inspira- tion die a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all ex- pended uses when you finish a Long Rest. At Higher Levels. Your Bardic Inspiration die changes when you reach certain Bard levels, as shown in the Bardic Die column of the Bard Features table. The die becomes a d8 at level 5, a di0 at level 10, and a d12 at level 15. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING You have learned to cast spells through your bardic arts. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Bard spells, which appear in the Bard spell list later in the class's description. Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Bard spell list. Dancing Lights and Vicious Mockery are recommended. Whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Bard spell list. When you reach Bard levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Bard spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Bard Features table. Spell Slots. The Bard Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level I+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Bard spell list. Charm Person, Color Spray, Disso- nant Whispers, and Healing Word are recommended. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 5c BarD FEATURES Proficiency Bis Bonus \_\_ Class Features i Level 1 +2 Bardic Inspiration, D6 Spellcasting 2 42 Expertise, D6 Jack of All Trades 3 +2 Bard Subclass Dé 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement D6 5 43 Font of Inspiration D8 6 +3 Subclass feature D8 7 +3 Countercharm D8 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement D8 9 +4 Expertise D8 10 +4 Magical Secrets D10 a +4 --- DI0 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement D10 13 +5 \_ D10 14 +5 Subclass feature D10 15 +5 ---- D12 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement D12 7 +6 --- D12 18 +6 Superior Inspiration D12 19 +6 Epic Boon D12 20 +6 Words of Creation D12 The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Bard levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Bard Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Bard spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 3 Bard, your list of pre- pared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination. If another Bard feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Bard spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Bard spell for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your Bard spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Musical Instru- ment as a Spellcasting Focus for your Bard spells. i aes # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Bardic Cantrips Spells Prepared # 2 4 BWwW WW WWW wWwWwWwW www CBwWWNNNNNNND NON eet re Sy a) ASS Sb ed) oF Se ea es # 1 1 1 1 # 2 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 3 4 4 4 4 4 4 16 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 22 4 LEVEL 2: EXPERTISE You gain Expertise (see the rules glossary) in two of your skill proficiencies of your choice. Performance and Persuasion are recommended if you have profi- ciency in them. At Bard level 9, you gain Expertise in two more of your skill proficiencies of your choice. LEVEL 2: JACK OF ALL TRADES You can add half your Proficiency Bonus (round down) to any ability check you make that uses a skill proficiency you lack and that doesn't otherwise use your Proficiency Bonus. For example, if you make a Strength (Athletics) check and lack Athletics proficiency, you can add half your Proficiency Bonus to the check. LEVEL 3: BARD SUBCLASS You gain a Bard subclass of your choice. The College of Dance, College of Glamour, College of Lore, and College of Valor subclasses are detailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Bard levels, For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Bard level or lower. Does you i beat a drum while chanting the deeds of ancient heroes? Strum a lute while crooning romantic tunes? Perform arias of stir- ring power? Recite dramatic monologues from classic tragedies? Use the rhythm of a folk dance to coordinate the movement of allies in battle? Compose naughty limericks? When you play a Bard, consider the style of artistic performance you favor, the moods you might invoke, and the themes that inspire your own creations. Are your poems inspired by mo- ments of natural beauty, or are they brooding reflections on loss? Do you prefer lofty hymns or rowdy tavern songs? Are you drawn to laments for the fallen or celebrations of joy? Do you dance merry jigs or perform elaborate interpretive cho- reography? Do you focus on one style of perfor- mance or strive to master them all? --- 1 al LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Bard lev- els 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: FONT OF INSPIRATION You now regain all your expended uses of Bardic In- spiration when you finish a Short or Long Rest. In addition, you can expend a spell slot (no action required) to regain one expended use of Bardic Inspiration. LEVEL 7: COUNTERCHARM You can use musical notes or words of power to dis- rupt mind-influencing effects. If you or a creature within 30 feet of you fails a saving throw against an effect that applies the Charmed or Frightened con- dition, you can take a Reaction to cause the save to be rerolled, and the new roll has Advantage. LEVEL 10: MAGICAL SECRETS You've learned secrets from various magical tradi- tions. Whenever you reach a Bard level (including this level) and the Prepared Spells number in the Bard Features table increases, you can choose any of your new prepared spells from the Bard, Cleric, Druid, and Wizard spell lists, and the chosen spells count as Bard spells for you (see a class's section for its spell list). In addition, whenever you replace a spell prepared for this class, you can replace it with a spell from those lists. LEVEL 18: SUPERIOR INSPIRATION When you roll Initiative, you regain expended uses of Bardic Inspiration until you have two if you have fewer than that. # A Baro Shapes Inspiration And Imagination Into Magic. LeveL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Spell Recall is recommended. LEVEL 20: WorDS OF CREATION You have mastered two of the Words of Creation: the words of life and death. You therefore always have the Power Word Heal and Power Word Kill spells prepared. When you cast either spell, you can target a second creature with it if that creature is within 10 feet of the first target. 61 # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES \| BARD SPELL LIST This section presents the Bard spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alphabetized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Spe- cial column, C means the spell requires Concentra- tion, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. CANTRIPS (LEVEL O BARD SPELLS) Spell Blade Ward Dancing Lights Friends Light Mage Hand Mending Message Minor Illusion Prestidigitation Starry Wisp Thunderclap True Strike Vicious Mockery LeveL 1 BARD SPELLS Spell Animal Friendship Bane Charm Person Color Spray Command Comprehend Languages Cure Wounds Detect Magic Disguise Self Dissonant Whispers Faerie Fire Feather Fall Healing Word Heroism Identify Mlusory Script Longstrider Silent Image Sleep Speak with Animals School Abjuration Illusion Enchantment Evocation Conjuration Transmutation Transmutation Illusion Transmutation Evocation Evocation Divination Enchantment School Enchantment Enchantment Enchantment Illusion Enchantment Divination Abjuration Divination Illusion Enchantment Evocation Transmutation Abjuration Enchantment Divination Illusion Transmutation Illusion Enchantment Divination Special c Cc Special c R C,R C ¢ R,M R,M Cc G R Spell Tasha's Hideous Laughter Thunderwave Unseen Servant LeveL 2 BARD SPELLS Spell Aid Animal Messenger Blindness/Deafness Calm Emotions Cloud of Daggers Crown of Madness Detect Thoughts Enhance Ability Enlarge/Reduce Enthrall Heat Metal Hold Person Invisibility Knock Lesser Restoration Locate Animals or Plants Locate Object Magic Mouth Mirror Image Phantasmal Force See Invisibility Shatter Silence Suggestion Zone of Truth LEVEL 3 BARD SPELLS Spell Bestow Curse Clairvoyance Dispel Magic Fear Feign Death Glyph of Warding Hypnotic Pattern Leomund's Tiny Hut Major Image Mass Healing Word School Special Enchantment ¢€ Evocation = Conjuration R School Special Abjuration an Enchantment R Transmutation ent Enchantment c Conjuration Cc Enchantment ¢ Divination (a Transmutation Cc Transmutation Cc Enchantment c Transmutation le Enchantment (\< Mlusion c Transmutation = Abjuration = Divination R Divination Cc Illusion R,M Illusion ne Illusion (35 Divination = Evocation a= Illusion CR Enchantment (a Enchantment = School Special Necromancy (e: Divination Cc,M Abjuration es Illusion C Necromancy R Abjuration M Illusion C Evocation R Illusion Cc Abjuration ed Spell Nondetection Plant Growth Sending Slow Speak with Dead Speak with Plants Stinking Cloud Tongues Levet 4 BARD SPELLS Spell Charm Monster Compulsion Confusion Dimension Door Fount of Moonlight Freedom of Movement Greater Invisibility Hallucinatory Terrain Locate Creature Phantasmal Killer Polymorph LEVEL 5 BARD SPELLS Spell Animate Objects Awaken Dominate Person Dream Geas Greater Restoration Hold Monster Legend Lore Mass Cure Wounds Mislead Modify Memory Planar Binding Raise Dead Rary's Telepathic Bond Serying Seeming Synaptic Static Teleportation Circle Yolande's Regal Presence School Abjuration Transmutation Divination Transmutation Necromancy Transmutation Conjuration Divination School Enchantment Enchantment Enchantment Conjuration Evocation Abjuration Ilusion Illusion Divination Illusion Transmutation School Transmutation Transmutation Enchantment Illusion Enchantment Abjuration Enchantment Divination Abjuration Illusion Enchantment Abjuration Necromancy Divination Divination Illusion Enchantment Conjuration Enchantment Special M c Special an aan Special c M c | zone \~DEEZENO\| c,M LeveL 6 BarD SPELLS Spell Eyebite Find the Path Guards and Wards Heroes' Feast Mass Suggestion Otto's Irresistible Dance Programmed Illusion True Seeing LEVEL 7 BARD SPELLS Spell Etherealness Forcecage Mirage Arcane Mordenkainen's Magnificent Mansion Mordenkainen's Sword Power Word Fortify Prismatic Spray Project Image Regenerate Resurrection Symbol Teleport Levet 8 BarD SPELLS Spell Antipathy/Sympathy Befuddlement Dominate Monster Glibness Mind Blank Power Word Stun LEVEL 9 BARD SPELLS Spell Foresight Power Word Heal Power Word Kill Prismatic Wall True Polymorph # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER GLASSES School Necromancy Special Divination Abjuration Conjuration Enchantment Enchantment Illusion fn zzo0\R9 Divination School Special Conjuration \_--- Evocation c,M Mlusion = Conjuration M Evocation c,M Enchantment *--- Evocation* Illusion c,M Transmutation Necromancy M Abjuration M Conjuration \_ School Special Enchantment *--- Enchantment --- Enchantment Cc Enchantment --- Abjuration* Enchantment \_ School Divination \_ Enchantment --- Enchantment - Abjuration Transmutation € 63 i. Co.tece of Dance Suscvass iA j BARD SUBCLASSES ABard subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Bard levels, as specified in the subclass. Bards form loose associations, which they call colleges, to preserve their traditions. This section presents the College of Dance, College of Glamour, College of Lore, and College of Valor subclasses. # College Of Dance Move in Harmony with the Cosmos Bards of the College of Dance know that the Words of Creation can't be contained within speech or song; the words are uttered by the movements of celestial bodies and flow through the motions of the smallest creatures. These Bards practice a way of being in harmony with the whirling cosmos that emphasizes agility, speed, and grace. LEVEL 3: DAZZLING FOOTWORK While you aren't wearing armor or wielding a Shield, you gain the following benefits. Dance Virtuoso. You have Advantage on any Cha- risma (Performance) check you make that involves you dancing. Unarmored Defense. Your base Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Charisma modifiers. Agile Strikes. When you expend a use of your Bar- dic Inspiration as part of an action, a Bonus Action, or a Reaction, you can make one Unarmed Strike as part of that action, Bonus Action, or Reaction. Bardic Damage. You can use Dexterity instead of Strength for the attack rolls of your Unarmed Strikes. When you deal damage with an Unarmed Strike, you can deal Bludgeoning damage equal toa roll of your Bardic Inspiration die plus your Dexter- ity modifier, instead of the strike's normal damage. This roll doesn't expend the die. LEVEL 6: INSPIRING MOVEMENT When an enemy you can see ends its turn within 5 feet of you, you can take a Reaction and expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration to move up to half your Speed. Then one ally of your choice within 30 feet of you can also move up to half their Speed using their Reaction. None of this feature's movement provokes Oppor- tunity Attacks. LEVEL 6: TANDEM FooTworkK When you roll Initiative, you can expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration if you don't have the Incapacitated condition. When you do so, roll your Bardic Inspiration die; you and each ally within 30 feet of you who can see or hear you gains a bonus to Initiative equal to the number rolled. LeveL 14: Leapinc EVASION When you are subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw and only half damage if you fail. If any creatures within 5 feet of you are making the same Dexterity saving throw, you can share this benefit with them for that save. You can't use this feature if you have the Incapaci- tated condition. COLLEGE OF GLAMOUR \| Weave Beguiling Fey Magic The College of Glamour traces its origins to the be- guiling magic of the Feywild. Bards who study this magic weave threads of beauty and terror into their songs and stories, and the mightiest among them can cloak themselves in otherworldly majesty. Their performances stir up wistful longing for forgotten innocence, evoke unconscious memories of long- held fears, and tug at the emotions of even the most hard-hearted listeners. LEVEL 3: BEGUILING MAGIc You always have the Charm Person and Mirror Image spells prepared. In addition, immediately after you cast an En- chantment or Illusion spell using a spell slot, you can cause a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself to make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, the target has the Charmed or Frightened condition (your choice) for 1 minute. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself ona success. Once you use this benefit, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending one use of your Bardic Inspiration (no action required). LEVEL 3: MANTLE OF INSPIRATION You can weave fey magic into a song or dance to fill others with vigor. As a Bonus Action, you can expend a use of Bardic Inspiration, rolling a Bardic Inspiration die. When you do so, choose a number of other creatures within 60 feet of yourself, up to a number equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). Each of those creatures gains a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to two times the number rolled on the Bardic Inspiration die, and then each can use its Reaction to move up to its Speed without provoking Opportunity Attacks. LEVEL 6: MANTLE OF MAJESTY You always have the Command spell prepared. As a Bonus Action, you cast Command without expending a spell slot, and you take on an unearthly Cottece of Glamour © Susciass Coutece oF Lore appearance for 1 minute or until your Conce..ra- tion ends. During this time, you can cast Cor imand as a Bonus Action without expending a spell siot. Any creature Charmed by you automatically fails its saving throw against the Command you cast with this feature.: Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 3+ spell slot (no action required). LEVEL 14; UNBREAKABLE MAJESTY Asa Bonus Action, you can assume a magically majestic presence for 1 minute or until you have the Incapacitated condition. For the duration, whenever any creature hits you with an attack roll for the first time on a turn, the attacker must succeed ona Charisma saving throw against your spell save DC, or the attack misses instead, as the creature recoils from your majesty. Once you assume this majestic presence, you can't do so again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. COLLEGE OF LORE \_ Plumb the Depths of Magical Knowledge Bards of the College of Lore collect spells and se- crets from diverse sources, such as scholarly tomes, mystical rites, and peasant tales. The college's mem- bers gather in libraries and universities to share their lore with one another. They also meet at festi- vals or affairs of state, where they can expose cor- ruption, unravel lies, and poke fun at self-important figures of authority. LEVEL 3: BONUS PROFICIENCIES You gain proficiency with three skills of your choice. LEVEL 3: CUTTING WoRDS You learn to use your wit to supernaturally distract, confuse, and otherwise sap the confidence and competence of others. When a creature that you can see within 60 feet of yourself makes a damage roll or succeeds on an ability check or attack roll, you can take a Reaction to expend one use of your Bardic Inspiration; roll your Bardic Inspiration die, and subtract the number rolled from the creature's roll, reducing the damage or potentially turning the success into a failure. LEVEL 6: MAGICAL DISCOVERIES You learn two spells of your choice. These spells can come from the Cleric, Druid, or Wizard spell list or any combination thereof (see a class's section for its spell list). A spell you choose must be a cantrip or a spell for which you have spell slots, as shown in the Bard Features table. You always have the chosen spells prepared, and whenever you gain a Bard level, you can replace one of the spells with another spell that meets these requirements. LEVEL 14: PEERLESS SKILL When you make an ability check or attack roll and fail, you can expend one use of Bardic Inspiration; roll the Bardic Inspiration die, and add the number rolled to the d20, potentially turning a failure into a success. On a failure, the Bardic Inspiration isn't expended. COLLEGE OF VALOR Sing the Deeds of Ancient Heroes Bards of the College of Valor are daring storytell- ers whose tales preserve the memory of the great heroes of the past. These Bards sing the deeds of the mighty in vaulted halls or to crowds gathered around great bonfires. They travel to witness great events firsthand and to ensure that the memory of these events doesn't pass away. With their songs, they inspire new generations to reach the same heights of accomplishment as the heroes of old. LEVEL 3: COMBAT INSPIRATION You can use your wit to turn the tide of battle. A creature that has a Bardic Inspiration die from you can use it for one of the following effects. Defense. When the creature is hit by an attack roll, that creature can use its Reaction to roll the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to its AC against that attack, potentially causing the attack to miss. Offense. Immediately after the creature hits a target with an attack roll, the creature can roll the Bardic Inspiration die and add the number rolled to the attack's damage against the target. LEVEL 3: MARTIAL TRAINING You gain proficiency with Martial weapons and training with Medium armor and Shields. In addition, you can use a Simple or Martial weapon as a Spellcasting Focus to cast spells from your Bard spell list. LEVEL 6: ExTRA ATTACK You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. In addition, you can cast one of your cantrips that has a casting time of an action in place of one of those attacks. LEVEL 14: BATTLE MAGIC After you cast a spell that has a casting time of an action, you can make one attack with a weapon as a Bonus Action. Co.cece oF Vator Susciass CLERIC A Miraculous Priest Divine Poe 1 \| # Hael Sroussard aie Core Cleric Traits s Primary Ability Wisdom Hit Point Die D8 per Cleric level Saving Throw Wisdom and Charisma \| Proficiencies \| Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: History, Insight, \| Medicine, Persuasion, or Religion Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons Armor Training Light and Medium armor and Shields Choose A or B: (A) Chain Shirt, Shield, Mace, Holy Symbol, Priest's Pack, and 7 \| GP; or (B) 110 GP Starting Equipment 5 LERICS DRAW POWER FROM THE REALMS ¢ of the gods and harness it to work miracles. \~/ Blessed by a deity, a pantheon, or another immortal entity, a Cleric can reach out to the divine magic of the Outer Planes---where gods dwell---and channel it to bolster people and battle foes. Because their power is a divine gift, Clerics typ- ically associate themselves with temples dedicated to the deity or other immortal force that unlocked their magic. Harnessing divine magic doesn't rely on specific training, yet Clerics might learn prayers and rites that help them draw on power from the Outer Planes. Not every member of a temple or shrine is a Cleric. Some priests are called to a simple life of temple service, carrying out their devotion through prayer and rituals, not through magic. Many mor- tals claim to speak for the gods, but few can marshal the power of those gods the way a Cleric can. # Becoming A Cleric... As A LEVEL\] CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Cleric Traits table. - Gain the Cleric's level 1 features, which are listed in the Cleric Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the following traits from the Core Cleric Traits table: Hit Point Die and training with Light and Medium armor and Shields. - Gain the Cleric's level 1 features, which are listed in the Cleric Features table. See the multiclassing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. a # Cleric Class Features Asa Cleric, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Cleric levels. These features are listed in the Cleric Features table. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING i You have learned to cast spells through prayer and meditation. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcast- ing. The information below details how you use those rules with Cleric spells, which appear on the Cleric spell list later in the class's description. Cantrips. You know three cantrips of your choice from the Cleric spell list. Guidance, Sacred Flame, and Thaumaturgy are recommended. Whenever you gain a Cleric level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Cleric spell list. When you reach Cleric levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Cleric spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Cleric Features table. Spell Slots. The Cleric Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Cleric spell list. Bless, Cure Wounds, Guiding Bolt, and Shield of Faith are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Cleric levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Cleric Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Cleric spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 3 Cleric, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination. If another Cleric feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Cleric spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of pre- pared spells, replacing any of the spells there with other Cleric spells for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your Cleric spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Holy Symbol as a Spellcasting Focus for your Cleric spells. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 69 2vel--- CLERIC eae Hi, Prepared Spell on = 7 Level a sels Class Features Divinity Cantrips Spells T 2/3 ne 7 8 9 1 +2 Spellcasting, Divine Order =\_ 4 2-------- \$23 28h ena. 2 +2 Channel Divinity 2 3 5 3 --------- ---- ----- ---- eS rs 3 42 Cleric Subclass 2 3 6 42---\>-\>------------- a 4 42 Ability Score Improvement 2 4 7, a ee ee 5 +3 Sear Undead 4 4 9 49.30 62\> Se Se eee. 6 +3 Subclass feature 3 4 10 433-------=------- \~ va 7 +3 Blessed Strikes 3 4 1 Be Se Re ee Ss ees 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 3 4 12 433 2---\]------\] 2 x 9 4 3 4 14 7 ee: a a 10 +4 Divine Intervention 3 5 15 4333 2--------~wN~ n ad --- 3 5 16 433 3 2.7 = = 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 3 5 16 433 824 See 13 +5 \_ 3 5 7 4 3 3) 3-32 cb DD oes 14 +5 Improved Blessed Strikes 3 5 7 43s By Bs A Oo ee ee 15 +5 *--- 3 5 18 433-3 - Pou J bs 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 3 5 18 43-3 Be 21 V Te 7 +6 Subclass feature 3 5 19 4333 2. 7 4 ag 18 +6* 4 5 20 433 3 3 79 7 4-9 19 +6 Epic Boon 4 5 21 433.3. 3) 2 t hy 20 +6 Greater Divine Intervention 4 5 22 4 Sy 3S) 8-2 Dk a LeveL 1: DIVINE ORDER You have dedicated yourself to one of the following sacred roles of your choice. Protector. Trained for battle, you gain proficiency with Martial weapons and training with Heavy armor. Thaumaturge. You know one extra cantrip from the Cleric spell list. In addition, your mystical con- nection to the divine gives you a bonus to your Intelligence (Arcana or Religion) checks. The bonus equals your Wisdom modifier (minimum of +1). LEVEL 2: CHANNEL DIVINITY You can channel divine energy directly from the Outer Planes to fuel magical effects. You start with two such effects: Divine Spark and Turn Undead, each of which is described below. Each time you use this class's Channel Divinity, choose which Channel Divinity effect from this class to create. You gain additional effect options at higher Cleric levels. You can use this class's Channel Divinity twice. You regain one of its expended uses when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain additional uses when you reach certain Cleric levels, as shown in the Channel Divinity column of the Cleric Features table. If a Channel Divinity effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals the spell save DC from this class's Spellcasting feature. Divine Spark. As a Magic action, you point your Holy Symbol at another creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself and focus divine energy at it. Roll 1d8 and add your Wisdom modifier. You either restore Hit Points to the creature equal to that total or force the creature to make a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes Necrotic or Radiant damage (your choice) equal to that to- tal. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage (round down). You roll an additional d8 when you reach Cleric levels 7 (2d8), 13 (3d8), and 18 (4d 8). Turn Undead. As a Magic action, you present your Holy Symbol and censure Undead creatures. Each Undead of your choice within 30 feet of you must make a Wisdom saving throw. If the creature fails its save, it has the Frightened and Incapacitated conditions for 1 minute. For that duration, it tries to move as far from you as it can on its turns. This effect ends early on the creature if it takes any dam- age, if you have the Incapacitated condition, or if you die. LEVEL 3: Ric SUBCLASS You gain a Cleric subclass of your choice. The Life Domain, Light Domain, Trickery Domain, and War Domain subclasses are detailed after this class's de- scription. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Cleric levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's fea- tures that are of your Cleric level or lower. LeveL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Cleric levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: SEAR UNDEAD Whenever you use Turn Undead, you can roll a number of d8s equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1d8) and add the rolls together. Each Undead that fails its saving throw against that use of Turn Undead takes Radiant damage equal to the roll's total. This damage doesn't end the turn effect. LEVEL 7: BLESSED STRIKES Divine power infuses you in battle. You gain one of the following options of your choice (if you get ei- ther option from a Cleric subclass in an older book, use only the option you choose for this feature). Divine Strike. Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with an attack roll using a weapon, you can cause the target to take an extra 1d8 Necrotic or Radiant damage (your choice). Potent Spellcasting. Add your Wisdom modifier to the damage you deal with any Cleric cantrip. LevEL 10: DIVINE INTERVENTION You can call on your deity or pantheon to inter- vene on your behalf. As a Magic action, choose any Cleric spell of level 5 or lower that doesn't require a Reaction to cast. As part of the same action, you cast that spell without expending a spell slot or needing Material components. You can't use this feature again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 14: IMPROVED BLESSED STRIKES The option you chose for Blessed Strikes grows more powerful. Divine Strike. The extra damage of your Divine Strike increases to 2d8. Potent Spellcasting. When you cast a Cleric can- trip and deal damage to a creature with it, you can give vitality to yourself or another creature within 60 feet of yourself, granting a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to twice your Wisdom modifier. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Fate is recommended. LEVEL 20: GREATER DIVINE INTERVENTION You can call on even more powerful divine inter- vention. When you use your Divine Intervention feature, you can choose Wish when you select a spell. If you do so, you can't use Divine Intervention again until you finish 2d4 Long Rests. CLERIC SPELL List This section presents the Cleric spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alphabetized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Spe- cial column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. CANTRIPS (LEVEL O CLERIC SPELLS) Spell School Special Guidance Divination c Light Evocation --- Mending Transmutation --- Resistance Abjuration c Sacred Flame Evocation Spare the Dying Necromancy *--- Thaumaturgy Transmutation* Toll the Dead Necromancy *--- Word of Radiance Evocation* --- Levet 1 CLERIC SPELLS Spell School Special Bane Enchantment G Bless Enchantment C,M Command Enchantment --- Create or Destroy Water Transmutation = --- Cure Wounds Abjuration --- Detect Evil and Good Divination Cc Detect Magic Divination CR Detect Poisonand Disease \_ Divination CR Guiding Bolt Evocation *--- Healing Word Abjuration --- f Inflict Wounds Necromancy* --- Protection from Evil and Abjuration cM Good Purify Food and Drink Transmutation R Sanctuary Abjuration --- Shield of Faith Abjuration C # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES sak Leven 2 Cleric SPELLS Spell School Special Aid Abjuration = Augury Divination R,M Blindness/Deafness Transmutation = --- Calm Emotions Enchantment ¢ Continual Flame Evocation M Enhance Ability Transmutation Cc Find Traps Divination --- Gentle Repose Necromancy R,M Hold Person Enchantment Cc Lesser Restoration Abjuration *Locate Object Divination Cc Prayer of Healing Abjuration* --- Protection from Poison Abjuration = Silence Illusion GR Spiritual Weapon Evocation (a Warding Bond Abjuration M Zone of Truth Enchantment --- LeveL 3 Cleric SPELLS Spell School Special Animate Dead Necromancy --- Aura of Vitality Abjuration € Beacon of Hope Abjuration iG Bestow Curse Necromancy Cc Clairvoyance Divination C,M Create Food and Water Conjuration *Daylight Evocation = Dispel Magic Abjuration --- Feign Death Necromancy R Glyph of Warding Abjuration M Magic Circle Abjuration M Mass Healing Word Abjuration --- Meld into Stone Transmutation R* Protection from Energy Abjuration c Abjuration --- Necromancy M Divination \_--- Necromancy = Conjuration © Divination = LeveL 4 CLERIC SPELLS Spell Aura of Life Aura of Purity Banishment Control Water Death Ward Divination Freedom of Movement Guardian of Faith Locate Creature Stone Shape LeveL 5 CLERIC SPELLS Spell Circle of Power Commune Contagion Dispel Evil and Good Flame Strike Geas Greater Restoration Hallow Insect Plague Legend Lore Mass Cure Wounds Planar Binding Raise Dead Serying Summon Celestial Level 6 CLeric SPELLS Spell Blade Barrier Create Undead Find the Path Forbiddance Harm Heal Heroes' Feast Planar Ally Sunbeam True Seeing Word of Recall School Abjuration Abjuration Abjuration Transmutation Abjuration Divination Abjuration Conjuration Divination Transmutation School Abjuration Divination Necromancy Abjuration Evocation Enchantment Abjuration Abjuration Conjuration Divination Abjuration Abjuration Necromancy Divination Conjuration School Evocation Necromancy Divination Abjuration Necromancy Abjuration Conjuration Conjuration Evocation Divination Conjuration Special c le Cc C. R,M Special Cc R C,M c,M Special Cc M c,M R,M = Zo \| A CLERIC PRAYS FOR THE DAY'S SPELLS. # Level 7 Cleric Spells Spell Conjure Celestial Divine Word Etherealness Fire Storm Plane Shift Power Word Fortify Regenerate Resurrection Symbol Levet 8 CLeric SPELLS Spell Antimagic Field Control Weather Earthquake Holy Aura Sunburst # Level 9 Cleric Spells Spell Astral Projection Gate Mass Heal Power Word Heal True Resurrection School Special Conjuration Cc Evocation ---*--- Conjuration Evocation* Conjuration M Enchantment --- Transmutation \_ Necromancy M Abjuration M School Special Abjuration iG Transmutation Cc Transmutation G Abjuration c,M Evocation --- School Special Necromancy M Conjuration c,M Abjuration \_--- Enchantment --- Necromancy M # Cleric Subclasses A Cleric subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Cleric levels, as specified in the subclass. Each Cleric subclass is named after a domain of existence that is favored by a god, pan- theon, or religious order. This section presents the Life Domain, Light Domain, Trickery Domain, and War Domain subclasses. LIFE DOMAIN Soothe the Hurts of the World The Life Domain focuses on the positive energy that helps sustain all life in the multiverse. Clerics who tap into this domain are masters of healing, using that life force to cure many hurts. Existence itself relies on the positive energy asso- ciated with this domain, so a Cleric of almost any religious tradition might choose it. This domain is particularly associated with agricultural deities, gods of healing or endurance, and gods of home and community. Religious orders of healing also seek the magic of this domain. LEVEL 3: DISCIPLE OF LIFE When a spell you cast with a spell slot restores Hit Points to a creature, that creature regains addi- tional Hit Points on the turn you cast the spell. The additional Hit Points equal 2 plus the spell slot's level. LEVEL 3: LIFE DOMAIN SPELLS Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Life Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. Lire DOMAIN SPELLS Cleric Level Prepared Spells 3 Aid, Bless, Cure Wounds, Lesser Restoration 5 Mass Healing Word, Revivify Aura of Life, Death Ward Greater Restoration, Mass Cure Wounds LEVEL 3: PRESERVE LIFE As a Magic action, you present your Holy Symbol and expend a use of your Channel Divinity to evoke healing energy that can restore a number of Hit Points equal to five times your Cleric level. Choose Bloodied creatures within 30 feet of yourself (which can include you), and divide those Hit Points among them. This feature can restore a creature to no more than half its Hit Point maximum.