# Oe 5, Waraior oF THE ELEMENTS WARRIOR OF THE ELEMENTS Wield Strikes and Bursts of Elemental Power Warriors of the Elements tap into the power of the Elemental Planes. Harnessing their supernatural focus, these Monks momentarily tame the energy of the Elemental Chaos to empower themselves in and out of battle. LEVEL 3: ELEMENTAL ATTUNEMENT At the start of your turn, you can expend 1 Focus Point to imbue yourself with elemental energy. The energy lasts for 10 minutes or until you have the Incapacitated condition. You gain the following ben- efits while this feature is active. Reach. When you make an Unarmed Strike, your reach is 10 feet greater than normal, as elemental energy extends from you. Elemental Strikes. Whenever you hit with your Unarmed Strike, you can cause it to deal your choice of Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder damage rather than its normal damage type. When you deal one of these types with it, you can also force the target to make a Strength saving throw. On a failed save, you can move the target up to 10 feet toward or away from you, as elemental energy swirls around it. LEVEL 3: MANIPULATE ELEMENTS You know the Elementalism spell. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for it. LEVEL 6: ELEMENTAL BURST As a Magic action, you can expend 2 Focus Points to cause elemental energy to burst in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point within 120 feet of your- self. Choose a damage type: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder. Each creature in the Sphere must make a Dexter- ity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes damage of the chosen type equal to three rolls of your Martial Arts die. On a successful save, a crea- ture takes half as much damage. LEVEL 1\]: STRIDE OF THE ELEMENTS While your Elemental Attunement is active, you also have a Fly Speed and a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. LEVEL 17: ELEMENTAL EPITOME While your Elemental Attunement is active, you also gain the following benefits. Damage Resistance. You gain Resistance to one of the following damage types of your choice: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder. At the start of each of your turns, you can change this choice. Destructive Stride. When you use you Step of the Wind, your Speed increases by 20 feet until the end of tive turn. For that duration, any creature of your choice takes damage equal to one roll of your Mar- tial Arts die when you enter a space within 5 feet of it. The damage type is your choice of Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder. A creature can take this damage only once per turn. Empowered Strikes. Once on each of your turns, you can deal extra damage to a target equal to one roll of your Martial Arts die when you hit it with an Unarmed Strike. The extra damage is the same type dealt by that strike. WARRIOR OF THE OPEN HAND Master Unarmed Combat Techniques Warriors of the Open Hand are masters of unarmed combat. They learn techniques to push and trip their opponents and manipulate their own energy to protect themselves from harm. LEVEL 3: OPEN HAND TECHNIQUE Whenever you hit a creature with an attack granted by your Flurry of Blows, you can impose one of the following effects on that target. Addle. The target can't make Opportunity Attacks until the start of its next turn. Push. The target must succeed on a Strength sav- ing throw or be pushed up to 15 feet away from you. Topple. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition. LEVEL 6: WHOLENESS OF BODY You gain the ability to heal yourself. As a Bonus Ac- tion, you can roll your Martial Arts die. You regain anumber of Hit Points equal to the number rolled plus your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1 Hit Point regained). You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL ll: FLEET STEP When you take a Bonus Action other than Step of the Wind, you can also use Step of the Wind imme- diately after that Bonus Action. LEVEL 17: QUIVERING PALM You gain the ability to set up lethal vibrations in someone's body. When you hit a creature with an Unarmed Strike, you can expend 4 Focus Points to start these imperceptible vibrations, which last for a number of days equal to your Monk level. The vibrations are harmless unless you take an action to end them. Alternatively, when you take the At- tack action on your turn, you can forgo one of the attacks to end the vibrations, To end them, you and rget must be on the same plane of existence. When you end them, the target must make a Consti- tution saving throw, taking 10d12 Force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. You can have only one creature under the effect of this feature at a time. You can end the vibrations harmlessly (no action required). | Core PALADIN TRAITS Primary Ability Strength and Charisma Hit Point Die D10 per Paladin level Wisdom and Charisma | Saving Throw | Proficiencies | Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: Athletics, Insight, Intimidation, Medicine, Persuasion, or Religion Weapon Proficiencies Simple and Martial weapons Light, Medium, and Heavy armor and Shields Armor Training Starting Equipment Choose A or B: (A) Chain Mail, Shield, Longsword, } 6 Javelins, Holy Symbol, | Priest's Pack, and 9 GP; or (B) 150 GP stand against the forces of annihilation and corruption. Whether sworn before a god's altar, in a sacred glade before nature spirits, or ina moment of desperation and grief with the dead as the only witnesses, a Paladin's oath is a powerful bond. It is a source of power that turns a devout warrior into a blessed champion. Paladins train to learn the skills of combat, mas- tering a variety of weapons and armor. Even so, their martial skills are secondary to the magical power they wield: power to heal the injured, smite their foes, and protect the helpless and those who fight at their side. Almost by definition, the life of a Paladin is an adventuring life, for every Paladin lives on the front lines of the cosmic struggle against annihilation. Fighters are rare enough among the ranks of a world's armies, but even fewer people can claim the calling of a Paladin. When they do receive the call, these blessed folk turn from their former occupa- tions and take up arms and magic. # P Aladins Are United By Their Oaths To. # Becoming A Paladin... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Paladin Traits table. - Gain the Paladin's level 1 features, which are listed in the Paladin Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER + Gain the following traits from the Core Paladin Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency with Mar- tial weapons, and training with Light and Medium armor and Shields. - Gain the Paladin's level 1 features, which are listed \| in the Paladin Features table. See the multiclass- ing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. # Paladin Class Features As a Paladin, you gain the following class features \| when you reach the specified Paladin levels. These features are listed in the Paladin Features table. LeveL 1: Lay On Hanps Your blessed touch can heal wounds. You have a pool of healing power that replenishes when you finish a Long Rest. With that pool, you can restore a total number of Hit Points equal to five times your Paladin level. As a Bonus Action, you can touch a creature, (which could be yourself) and draw power fromthe \_ pool of healing to restore a number of Hit Points to that creature, up to the maximum amount remain- ing in the pool. You can also expend 5 Hit Points from the pool of healing power to remove the Poisoned condition from the creature; those points don't also restore Hit Points to the creature. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING You have learned to cast spells through prayer and meditation. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcast- ing. The information below details how you use those rules with Paladin spells, which appear in the Paladin spell list later in the class's description. Spell Slots. The Paladin Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 Paladin spells. Heroism and Searing Smite are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Paladin levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Paladin Features table. When- ever that number increases, choose additional Paladin spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the Paladin Features table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 5 Paladin, your list of prepared spells can include six Paladin spells of level 1 or 2 in any combination. If another Paladin feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Paladin spells for you. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES ---- # Paladin Features Proficiency Level Bonus \_\_ Class Features 1 +2 Lay On Hands, Spellcasting, Weapon Mastery 2 +2 Fighting Style, Paladin's Smite B +2 Channel Divinity, Paladin Subclass 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement 5 +3 Extra Attack, Faithful Steed 6 43 Aura of Protection 7 +3 Subclass feature 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 9 +4 Abjure Foes 10 +4 Aura of Courage V +4 Radiant Strikes 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 13 +5 = 14 +5 Restoring Touch 15 +5 Subclass feature 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 7 +6 \_ 18 +6 Aura Expansion 19 +6 Epic Boon 20 +6 Subclass feature Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one spell on your list with another Paladin spell for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your Paladin spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Holy Symbol as a Spellcasting Focus for your Paladin spells. LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of two kinds of weapons of your choice with which you have proficiency, such as Longswords and Javelins. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kinds of weapons you chose. For example, you could switch to using the mastery properties of Hal- berds and Fiails. LEVEL 2: FIGHTING STYLE You gain a Fighting Style feat of your choice (see chapter 5 for feats). Instead of choosing one of those feats, you can choose the option below. Blessed Warrior. You learn two Cleric cantrips of your choice (see the Cleric class's section for a list of Cleric spells). Guidance and Sacred Flame are # Chapter 31 Character Classes Channel Prepared ---Spell Slots per Spell Level--- Divinity Spells 1 2 3 # 4 5 4 2 2 = =\| =\ le \| \| \| \| | | | WON NA HU AW \| \| | I \| | gh # Rbrerhnh Tis # 15 15 WWW wWwWwWwWwWwWWND Wwwwnn = = NN = # 2 2 2 2 2 2 Z 2 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 o RRR RR RR RR RR RR RRR WWD WK WW wWWwHWWwWHNwnnuwnn recommended. The chosen cantrips count as Pala- din spells for you, and Charisma is your spellcasting ability for them. Whenever you gain a Paladin level, you can replace one of these cantrips with another Cleric cantrip. LEVEL 2: PALADIN'S SMITE You always have the Divine Smite spell prepared. In addition, you can cast it without expending a spell slot, but you must finish a Long Rest before you can cast it in this way again. LEVEL 3: CHANNEL DIVINITY You can channel divine energy directly from the Outer Planes, using it to fuel magical effects. You start with one such effect: Divine Sense, which is described below. Other Paladin features give addi- tional Channel Divinity effect options. Each time you use this class's Channel Divinity, you choose which effect from this class to create. You can use this class's Channel Divinity twice. You regain one of its expended uses when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain an additional use when you reach Paladin level 11. if'a Channel Divinity effect requires a saving throw, the DC equals the spell save DC from this class's Spellcasting feature. Divine Sense. As a Bonus Action, you can open your awareness to detect Celestials, Fiends, and Undead. For the next 10 minutes or until you have the Incapacitated condition, you know the location of any creature of those types within 60 feet of yourself, and you know its creature type. Within the same radius, you also detect the presence of any place or object that has been consecrated or dese- crated, as with the Hallow spell. LEVEL 3: PALADIN SUBCLASS You gain a Paladin subclass of your choice. The Oath of Devotion, Oath of Glory, Oath of the An- cients, and Oath of Vengeance subclasses are de- tailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Paladin levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Pal- adin level or lower. LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Paladin levels 8, 12, and 16. LEvEL 5: ExTRA ATTACK You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. LEVEL 5: FAITHFUL STEED You can call on the aid of an otherworldly steed. You always have the Find Steed spell prepared. You can also cast the spell once without expend- ing a spell slot, and you regain the ability to do so when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 6: AURA OF PROTECTION You radiate a protective, unseeable aura in a 10-foot Emanation that originates from you. The aura is in- active while you have the Incapacitated condition. You and your allies in the aura gain a bonus to saving throws equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum bonus of +1). If another Paladin is present, a creature can ben- efit from only one Aura of Protection at a time; the creature chooses which aura while in them. Levet 9: ABJURE FOES As a Magic action, you can expend one use of this class's Channel Divinity to overwhelm foes with awe. As you present your Holy Symbol or weapon, BREAKING YouR OATH A Paladin tries to hold to the highest standards of conduct, but even the most dedicated are fallible. Sometimes a Paladin transgresses their oath. A Paladin who has broken a vow typically seeks absolution, spending an all-night vigil as a sign of penitence or undertaking a fast. After a rite of forgiveness, the Paladin starts fresh. If your Paladin unrepentantly violates their oath, talk to your DM. Your Paladin should probably take a more appropriate subclass or even aban- don the class and adopt another one.: - you can target a number of creatures equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature) that you can see within 60 feet of yourself. Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. While Frightened in this way, a target can do only one of the following on its turns: move, take an action, or take a Bonus Action. LEVEL 10: AURA OF COURAGE You and your allies have Immunity to the Fright- ened condition while in your Aura of Protection. If a Frightened ally enters the aura, that condition has no effect on that ally while there. LEVEL 11: RADIANT STRIKES Your strikes now carry supernatural power. When you hit a target with an attack roll using a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike, the target takes an extra 1d8 Radiant damage. LEVEL 14: RESTORING TOUCH When you use Lay On Hands on a creature, you can also remove one or more of the following conditions from the creature: Blinded, Charmed, Deafened, Frightened, Paralyzed, or Stunned. You must ex- pend 5 Hit Points from the healing pool of Lay On Hands for each of these conditions you remove; those points don't also restore Hit Points to the creature. LEVEL 18: AURA EXPANSION Your Aura of Protection is now a 30-foot Emanation. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Truesight is recommended. CUADTED ZI CUADANTUD NI accra fee) A Pavaoin's OEOICATION TOMER TOAUSE MANIFESTS AS MAGICAUMIGHIE PALADIN SPELL LIST This section presents the Paladin spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alpha- betized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Special column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. LeveL 1 PALADIN SPELLS Spell School Special Bless Enchantment C,M Command Enchantment *--- Compelled Duel Enchantment gc. Cure Wounds Abjuration* Detect Evil and Good Divination c Detect Magic Divination CR Detect Poison and Disease \_ Divination CR a) Divine Favor Transmutation = Divine Smite Evocation = Heroism Enchantment GS Protection from Evil and Abjuration c,M ' Good Spell School Special \| {I. Purify Food and Drink Transmutation R Daylight Evocation --- 4 Searing Smite Evocation \_ Dispel Magic Abjuration *--- Shield of Faith Abjuration ig Elemental Weapon Transmutation (ay Thunderous Smite Evocation* Magic Circle Abjuration M Wrathful Smite Necromancy \_ Remove Curse Abjuration = LEVEL 2 PALADIN SPELLS Reel Necromaney M Spell School Special LEVEL 4 PALADIN SPELLS Aid Abjuration \_ Spell School Special Find Steed Conjuration --- Aura of Life Abjuration Cc Gentle Repose Necromancy R,M Aura of Purity Abjuration G Lesser Restoration Abjuration --- Banishment Abjuration (es Locate Object Divination a Death Ward Abjuration t= Magic Weapon Transmutation = --- Locate Creature Divination c Prayer of Healing Abjuration = Staggering Smite Enchantment --- Protection from Poison Abjuration *Shining Smite Transmutation C LEVEL 5 PALADIN SPELLS Warding Bond Abjuration M Spell School Special Zone of Truth Enchantment --- Banishing Smite Conjuration c Circle of Power Abjuration ¢ LEVEL 3 PALADIN SPELLS Destructive Wave Evocation --- Spell School Special Dispel Evil and Good Abjuration Cc Aura of Vitality Abjuration Cc Geas Enchantment a Blinding Smite Evocation --- Greater Restoration Abjuration M Create Food and Water Conjuration* Raise Dead Necromancy M Crusader's Mantle Transmutation C Summon Celestial Conjuration CM # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Px LADIN SUBCLASSES A Paladin subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Paladin levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Oath of Devotion, Oath of Glory, Oath of the Ancients, and Oath of Vengeance subclasses. Each of these subclasses represents a body of oaths that a Paladin begins taking upon joining the class. The final oath, taken at level 3, is the culmi- nation of a Paladin's training. Some characters with this class don't consider themselves true Paladins until they've reached level 3 and made this oath. For others, the swearing of the oath is a formality, an official stamp on what was already in their hearts. OaTH OF DEVOTION \_ Uphold the Ideals of Justice and Order The Oath of Devotion binds Paladins to the ideals of justice and order. These Paladins meet the ar- chetype of the knight in shining armor. They hold themselves to the highest standards of conduct, and some---for better or worse---hold the rest of the world to the same standards. Many who swear this oath are devoted to gods of law and good and use their gods' tenets as the measure of personal devotion. Others hold angels as their ideals and incorporate images of angelic wings into their helmets or coats of arms. These paladins share the following tenets: - Let your word be your promise. - Protect the weak and never fear to act. - Let your honorable deeds be an example. LEVEL 3: OATH OF DEVOTION SPELLS The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of Devotion Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. OaTH OF DEVOTION SPELLS Paladin Level Spells 3 Protection from Evil and Good, Shield of Faith Aid, Zone of Truth 9 Beacon of Hope, Dispel Magic 13 Freedom of Movement, Guardian of Faith 7 Commune, Flame Strike Levit 3: SACRED WEAPON When you take the Attack action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to imbue one Melee weapon that you are holding with positive For LO minutes or until you use this feature Oatw oF Devotion Ontw oF Gory SuBciass again, you add your Charisma modifier to attack rolls you make with that weapon (minimum bonus of +1), and each time you hit with it, you cause it to deal its normal damage type or Radiant damage. The weapon also emits Bright Light in a 20-foot radius and Dim Light 20 feet beyond that. You can end this effect early (no action required). This effect also ends if you aren't carrying the weapon. LevEL 7: AURA OF DEVOTION You and your allies have Immunity to the Charmed condition while in your Aura of Protection. If a Charmed ally enters the aura, that condition has no effect on that ally while there. LEVEL 15: SMITE OF PROTECTION Your magical smite now radiates protective energy. Whenever you cast Divine Smite, you and your allies have Half Cover while in your Aura of Protection. The aura has this benefit until the start of your next turn. LEVEL 20: Hoty NIMBUS As a Bonus Action, you can imbue your Aura of Protection with holy power, granting the benefits below for 10 minutes or until you end them (no ac- tion required). Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required). Holy Ward. You have Advantage on any saving throw you are forced to make by a Fiend or an Undead. Radiant Damage. Whenever an enemy starts its turn in the aura, that creature takes Radiant dam- age equal to your Charisma modifier plus your Pro- ficiency Bonus. Sunlight. The aura is filled with Bright Light that is sunlight. OaTH OF GLORY Strive for the Heights of Heroism Paladins who take the Oath of Glory believe they and their companions are destined to achieve glory through deeds of heroism. They train diligently and encourage their companions, so they're all ready when destiny calls. These paladins share the following tenets:: Endeavor to be known by your deeds. - Face hardships with courage. - Inspire others to strive for glory. LEVEL 3: INSPIRING SMITE Immediately after you cast Divine Smile. you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity and distr bute Temporary Hit Points to creatures of your choice within 30 feet of yourself, which can include you. The total number of Temporary Hit Points equals 2d8 plus your Paladin level, divided among the chosen creatures however you like. LeveL 3: OATH OF GLORY SPELLS The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of Glory Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. OaTH OF GLORY SPELLS Paladin Level Spells 3 Guiding Bolt, Heroism 5 Enhance Ability, Magic Weapon 9 Haste, Protection from Energy 13 Compulsion, Freedom of Movement 7 Legend Lore, Yolande's Regal Presence LEVEL 3: PEERLESS ATHLETE Asa Bonus Action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to augment your athleticism. For 1 hour, you have Advantage on Strength (Athletics) and Dexterity (Acrobatics) checks, and the distance of your Long and High Jumps increases by 10 feet (this extra distance costs movement as normal). LEVEL 7: AURA OF ALACRITY Your Speed increases by 10 feet. In addition, whenever an ally enters your Aura of Protection for the first time on a turn or starts their turn there, the ally's Speed increases by 10 feet until the end of their next turn. LEVEL 15: GLorIoUS DEFENSE You can turn defense into a sudden strike. When you or another creature you can see within 10 feet of you is hit by an attack roll, you can take a Reac- tion to grant a bonus to the target's AC against that attack, potentially causing it to miss. The bonus equals your Charisma modifier (minimum of +1). If the attack misses, you can make one attack with a weapon against the attacker as part of this Reaction if the attacker is within your weapon's range. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. Leve!. 20: Livinc LEGEND You can empower yourself with the legends--- whether true or exaggerated---of your great deeds. As a Bonus Action, you gain the benefits below for 10 minutes. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required). Charismatic. You are blessed with an otherworldly presence and have Advantage on all Charisma checks. Saving Throw Reroll. If you fail a saving throw, you can take a Reaction to reroll it. You must use this new roll. Unerring Strike. Once on each of your turns when you make an attack roll with a weapon and miss, you can cause that attack to hit instead. OATH OF THE ANCIENTS Preserve Life and Light in the World The Oath of the Ancients is as old as the first elves. Paladins who swear this oath cherish the light; they love the beautiful and life-giving things of the world more than any principles of honor, courage, and justice. They often adorn their armor and clothing with images of growing things---leaves, antlers, or flowers---to reflect their commitment to preserving life and light. These paladins share the following tenets: - Kindle the light of hope. - Shelter life. - Delight in art and laughter. LEVEL 3: NATURE'S WRATH As a Magic action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to conjure spectral vines around nearby creatures. Each creature of your choice that you can see within 15 feet of yourself must succeed on a Strength saving throw or have the Restrained condition for 1 minute. A Restrained creature re- peats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. LEVEL 3: OATH OF THE ANCIENTS SPELLS The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of the Ancients Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. OATH OF THE ANCIENTS SPELLS Paladin Level Spells 3 Ensnaring Strike, Speak with Animals 5 Misty Step, Moonbeam 9 Plant Growth, Protection from Energy 13 Ice Storm, Stoneskin V7 Commune with Nature, Tree Stride # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER GLASSES TIR LEVEL 7: AURA OF WARDING Ancient magic lies so heavily upon you that it forms an eldritch ward, blunting energy from beyond the Material Plane; you and your allies have Resistance to Necrotic, Psychic, and Radiant damage while in your Aura of Protection. LEVEL 15: UNDYING SENTINEL When you are reduced to O Hit Points and not killed outright, you can drop to 1 Hit Point instead, and you regain a number of Hit Points equal to three times your Paladin level. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. Additionally, you can't be aged magically, and you cease visibly aging. LevEL 20: ELDER CHAMPION Asa Bonus Action, you can imbue your Aura of Protection with primal power, granting the benefits below for 1 minute or until you end them (no action required). Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also re- store your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required). Diminish Defiance. Enemies in the aura have Dis- advantage on saving throws against your spells and Channel Divinity options. Regeneration. At the start of each of your turns, you regain 10 Hit Points. Swift Spells. Whenever you cast a spell that has a casting time of an action, you can cast it using a Bonus Action instead. OATH OF VENGEANCE Punish Evildoers at Any Cost The Oath of Vengeance is a solemn commitment to punish those who have committed grievously evil acts. When evil armies slaughter helpless villagers, when a tyrant defies the will of the gods, when a thieves' guild grows too violent, when a dragon rampages through the countryside---at times like these, paladins arise and swear an Oath of Ven- geance to set right what has gone wrong. These paladins share the following tenets: - Show the wicked no mercy. - Fight injustice and its causes. - Aid those harmed by injustice. LEVEL 3: OATH OF VENGEANCE SPELLS The magic of your oath ensures you always have certain spells ready; when you reach a Paladin level specified in the Oath of Vengeance Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. OATH OF THE ANCIENTS. UBCLASS. OattH OF VENGEANCE SPELLS Paladin Level Spells 3 Bane, Hunter's Mark " 5 Hold Person, Misty Step r 9 Haste, Protection from Energy 13 Banishment, Dimension Door 7 Hold Monster, Scrying LEVEL 3: Vow OF ENMITY When you take the Attack action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to utter a vow of enmity against a creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. You have Advantage on attack rolls against the creature for 1 minute or until you use this feature again. If the creature drops to O Hit Points before the vow ends, you can transfer the vow to a differ- ent creature within 30 feet of yourself (no action required). LEVEL 7: RELENTLESS AVENGER Your supernatural focus helps you close off a foe's retreat. When you hit a creature with an Opportu- nity Attack, you can reduce the creature's Speed to O until the end of the current turn. You can then move up to half your Speed as part of the same Reaction. This movement doesn't provoke Opportu- nity Attacks. LEVEL 15: SOUL OF VENGEANCE Immediately after a creature under the effect of your Vow of Enmity hits or misses with an attack roll, you can take a Reaction to make a melee attack against that creature if it's within range. LEVEL 20: AVENGING ANGEL As a Bonus Action, you gain the benefits below for 10 minutes or until you end them (no action re- quired). Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. You can also re- store your use of it by expending a level 5 spell slot (no action required). Flight. You sprout spectral wings on your back, have a Fly Speed of 60 feet, and can hover. Frightful Aura. Whenever an enemy starts its turn in your Aura of Protection, that creature must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Frightened condition for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. Attack rolls against the Frightened creature have Advantage. OatH oF VENGEANCE Susciass:; hem | Core RANGER TRAITS Primary Ability Dexterity and Wisdom Hit Point Die D10 per Ranger level Saving Throw Strength and Dexterity Proficiencies Skill Proficiencies Choose 3: Animal Handling, Athletics, Insight, Investi- gation, Nature, Perception, } Stealth, or Survival Simple and Martial weapons Light and Medium armor and Shields Choose A or B: (A) Studded Leather Armor, Scimitar, Shortsword, Longbow, 20 Arrows, Quiver, Druidic Focus (sprig of mistletoe), Explorer's Pack, and 7 GP; or (B) # 150 Gp Weapon Proficiencies Armor Training Starting Equipment 7) AR FROM BUSTLING CITIES, AMID THE trees of trackless forests and across wide /. plains, Rangers keep their unending watch in the wilderness. Rangers learn to track their quarry as a predator does, moving stealthily through the wilds and hiding themselves in brush and rubble. Thanks to their connection with nature, Rangers can also cast spells that harness primal powers of the wilderness. A Ranger's talents and magic are honed with deadly focus to protect the world from the ravages of monsters and tyrants. # Becoming A Ranger... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Ranger Traits table. - Gain the Ranger's level 1 features, which are listed in the Ranger Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the following traits from the Core Ranger Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency with Mar- tial weapons, proficiency in one skill of your choice from the Ranger's skill list, and training with Light and Medium armor and Shields. Gain the Ranger's level 1 features, which are listed in the Ranger Features table. See the multiclass- ing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. # Ranger Class Features As a Ranger, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Ranger levels. These features are listed in the Ranger Features table. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING You have learned to channel the magical essence of nature to cast spells. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Ranger spells, which appear in the Ranger spell list later in the class's description. Spell Slots. The Ranger Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 Ranger spells. Cure Wounds and Ensnaring Strike are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Ranger levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Ranger Features table. When- ever that number increases, choose additional Ranger spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the Ranger Features table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 5 Ranger, your list of prepared spells can include six Ranger spells of level 1 or 2 in any combination. If another Ranger feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Ranger spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one spellon your list with another Ranger spell for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your Ranger spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Ranger spells. = LEVEL \|: FAVORED ENEMY You always have the Hunter's Mark spell prepared. You can cast it twice without expending a spell slot, and you regain all expended uses of this ability when you finish a Long Rest. The number of times you can cast the spell with- out a spell slot increases when you reach certain Ranger levels, as shown in the Favored Enemy col- umn of the Ranger Features table. Auavnrern tli nuananrrno Aracere # Ranger Features Proficiency Level Bonus \_\_ Class Features 1 +2 Spellcasting, Favored Enemy, Weapon Mastery 2 +2 Deft Explorer, Fighting Style 3 42 Ranger Subclass 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement 5 +3 Extra Attack 6 +3 Roving 7 +3 Subclass feature 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 9 +4 Expertise 10 +4 Tireless n +4 Subclass feature 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 13 +5 Relentless Hunter 14 +5 Nature's Veil 15 +5 Subclass feature 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 7 +6 Precise Hunter 18 +6 Feral Senses 19 +6 Epic Boon 20 +6 Foe Slayer LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of two kinds of weapons of your choice with which you have proficiency, such as Longbows and Shortswords. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kinds of weapons you chose. For example, you could switch to using the mastery properties of Scimitars and Longswords. LEVEL 2: DEFT EXPLORER Thanks to your travels, you gain the following benefits. Expertise. Choose one of your skill proficiencies with which you lack Expertise. You gain Expertise in that skill. Languages. You know two languages of your choice from the language tables in chapter 2. LEVEL 2: FIGHTING STYLE You gain a Fighting Style feat of your choice (see chapter 5). Instead of choosing one of those feats, you can choose the option below. Druidic Warrior. You learn two Druid cantrips of your choice (see the Druid class's section for a list of » BPN i 3 \| CHARACTER CLASSES Favored Prepared ---Spell Slots per Spel! Level--- Enemy Spells 1 2 3 4 5 2 2 2 ---- = = = If I \| le \| | | | \| | lt | I\] | | # Brennh Ato a Ss hae RRR RRR RR RR RRR WWD WwW bw KWwWWWwWwWwwnwnwnn Www wWwWwWWwYwWwWwnn WwWwwwnn = = NN = # Z 2 2 3 3 3 3 4 4 4 4 5 5 5 5 6 6 6 6 1S Druid spells). Guidance and Starry Wisp are recom- mended. The chosen cantrips count as Ranger spells for you, and Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for them. Whenever you gain a Ranger level, you can replace one of these cantrips with another Druid cantrip. LEVEL 3: RANGER SUBCLASS You gain a Ranger subclass of your choice. The Beast Master, Fey Wanderer, Gloom Stalker, and Hunter subclasses are detailed after this class's de- scription. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Ranger levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's fea- tures that are of your Ranger level or lower. LeveL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Ranger levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: EXTRA ATTACK You can attack twice instead of once whenever you take the Attack action on your turn. Your Speed increases by 10 feet while you aren't wearing Heavy armor. You also have a Climb Speed and a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. LEVEL 9: EXPERTISE Choose two of your skill proficiencies with which you lack Expertise. You gain Expertise in those skills. LEVEL 10: TIRELESS Primal forces now help fuel you on your journeys, granting you the following benefits. Temporary Hit Points. As a Magic action, you can give yourself a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to 1d8 plus your Wisdom modifier (minimum of 1). You can use this action a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. Decrease Exhaustion. Whenever you finish a Short Rest, your Exhaustion level, if any, decreases by 1. LEVEL 13: RELENTLESS HUNTER Taking damage can't break your Concentration on Hunter's Mark. LEVEL 14: NATURE'S VEIL You invoke spirits of nature to magically hide your- self. As a Bonus Action, you can give yourself the Invisible condition until the end of your next turn. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 17: PRECISE HUNTER You have Advantage on attack rolls against the creature currently marked by your Hunter's Mark. LEVEL 18: FERAL SENSES Your connection to the forces of nature grants you Blindsight with a range of 30 feet. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Dimensional Travel is recommended. LEVEL 20: FOE SLAYER The damage die of your Hunter's Mark is a d10 rather than a d6. # Ranger Spell List This section presents the Ranger spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alpha- betized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Special column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. Levet 1 RANGER SPELLS Spell Alarm Animal Friendship Cure Wounds Detect Magic Detect Poison and Disease Ensnaring Strike Entangle Fog Cloud Goodberry Hail of Thorns Hunter's Mark Jump Longstrider Speak with Animals LEVEL 2 RANGER SPELLS Spell Aid Animal Messenger Barkskin Beast Sense Cordon of Arrows Darkvision Enhance Ability Find Traps Gust of Wind Lesser Restoration Locate Animals or Plants Locate Object Magic Weapon Pass without Trace Protection from Poison Silence Spike Growth Summon Beast LEVEL 3 RANGER SPELLS Spell Conjure Animals Conjure Barrage Daylight Dispel Magic Elemental Weapon Lightning Arrow School Abjuration R Special Enchantment *Abjuration --- Divination CGR Divination c,R Conjuration Cc Conjuration Cc Conjuration Cc Conjuration = Conjuration* Divination Cc Transmutation \_ Transmutation --- Divination R School Abjuration --- Special Enchantment R Transmutation *Divination GR Transmutation = Transmutation* Transmutation Cc Divination \_--- Evocation Cc Abjuration --- Divination R Divination Cc Transmutation = --- Abjuration c Abjuration = Illusion CR Transmutation Cc Conjuration c,M School Special Conjuration (c Conjuration = Evocation \_ Abjuration --- Transmutation Cc Transmutation --- Spell Meld into Stone Nondetection Plant Growth Protection from Energy Revivify Speak with Plants Summon Fey Water Breathing Water Walk Wind Wall