# Great Weapon Fighting Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) When you roll damage for an attack you make with a Melee weapon that you are holding with two hands, you can treat any 1 or 2 on a damage die as a 3. The weapon must have the Two-Handed or Versa- tile property to gain this benefit. INTERCEPTION Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) When a creature you can see hits another creature within 5 feet of you with an attack roll, you can take a Reaction to reduce the damage dealt to the target by 1d10 plus your Proficiency Bonus. You must be holding a Shield or a Simple or Martial weapon to use this Reaction. PROTECTION Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) When a creature you can see attacks a target other than you that is within 5 feet of you, you can take a Reaction to interpose your Shield if you're holding one. You impose Disadvantage on the triggering attack roll and all other attack rolls against the tar- get until the start of your next turn if you remain within 5 feet of the target. THROWN WEAPON FIGHTING Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) When you hit with a ranged attack roll using a weapon that has the Thrown property, you gaina +2 bonus to the damage roll. Two-WEAPON FIGHTING Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Fea ture) When you make an extra attack as a result of using a weapon that has the Light property, you can add your ability modifier to the damage of that attack if you aren't already adding it to the damage. | UNARMED FIGHTING! Fighting Style Feat (Prerequisite: Fighting Style Feature) } When you hit with your Unarmed Strike and deal | damage, you can deal Bludgeoning damage equal | to 1d6 plus your Strength modifier instead of the! normal damage of an Unarmed Strike. If you aren't "vt holding any weapons or a Shield when you make the Y attack roll, the d6 becomes a d8. At the start of each of your turns, you can deal 1d4 Bludgeoning damage to one creature Grap- pled by you. Epic BOON FEATS These feats are in the Epic Boon category. Boon OF ComBAT PRowESS Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. \| Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, toa maximum of 30. Peerless Aim. When you miss with an attack roll, i you can hit instead. Once you use this benefit, you can't use it again until the start of your next turn. Boon OF DIMENSIONAL TRAVEL ud Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase, Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, to a maximum of 30. Blink Steps. Immediately after you take the Attack action or the Magic action, you can teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Boon OF ENERGY RESISTANCE Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, to a maximum of 30. Energy Resistances. You gain Resistance to two of the following damage types of your choice: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Necrotic, Poison, Psychic, Radiant, or Thunder. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your choices. Energy Redirection. When you take damage of one of the types chosen for the Energy Resistances benefit, you can take a Reaction to direct damage of the same type toward another creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself that isn't behind Total Cover. If you do so, that creature must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Constitu- tion modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or take dam- age equal to 2d12 plus your Constitution modifier. BOON OF FATE Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, to a maximum of 30. Improve Fate. When you or another creature within 60 feet of you succeeds on or fails a D20 Test, you can roll 2d4 and apply the total rolled as a bonus or penalty to the d20 roll. Once you use this benefit, you can't use it again until you roll Initiative or finish a Short or Long Rest. BOON OF FoRTITUDE Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, toa maximum of 30. Fortified Health. Your Hit Point maximum in- creases by 40. In addition, whenever you regain Hit Points, you can regain additional Hit Points equal to your Constitution modifier. Once you've regained these additional Hit Points, you can't do so again until the start of your next turn. BOON OF!RRESISTIPLE OFFENSE Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase your Strength or Dexterity score by 1, toa maximum of 30. Overcome Defenses. The Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage you deal always ignores Resistance. Overwhelming Strike. When you roll a 20 on the d20 for an attack roll, you can deal extra damage to the target equal to the ability score increased by this feat. The extra damage's type is the same as the attack's type. BOON OF RECOVERY Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, toa maximum of 30. Last Stand. When you would be reduced to 0 Hit Points, you can drop to 1 Hit Point instead and regain a number of Hit Points equal to half your Hit Point maximum. Once you use this benefit, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. Recover Vitality. You have a pool of ten dl0s. As a Bonus Action, you can expend dice from the pool, roll those dice, and regain a number of Hit Points equal to the roll's total. You regain all the expended dice when you finish a Long Rest. BOON OF SKILL Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, to a maximum of 30. All-Around Adept. You gain proficiency in all skills. Expertise. Choose one skill in which you lack Ex- pertise. You gain Expertise in that skill. BOON OF SPEED Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, to a maximum of 30. Escape Artist. As a Bonus Action, you can take the Disengage action, which also ends the Grappled condition on you. Quickness. Your Speed increases by 30 feet. BOON oF SPELL RECALL Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+, Spellcasting i Feature) 8 You gain the following benefits. \| Ability Score Increase. Increase your Intelligence, { \| Wisdom, or Charisma score by 1, to a maximum of \. Free Casting. Whenever you cast a spell with a level 1-4 spell slot, roll 1d4. If the number you roll is the same as the slot's level, the slot isn't expended. BOON OF THE NIGHT SPIRIT Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by 1, toa maximum of 30. Merge with Shadows. While within Dim Light or Darkness, you can give yourself the Invisible condi- tion as a Bonus Action. The condition ends on you immediately after you take an action, a Bonus Ac- tion, or a Reaction. Shadowy Form. While within Dim Light or Dark- ness, you have Resistance to all damage except Psy- chic and Radiant. BOON OF TRUESIGHT Epic Boon Feat (Prerequisite: Level 19+) You gain the following benefits. Ability Score Increase. Increase one ability score of your choice by I, toa maximum of 30. Truesight. You have Truesight with a range of 60 feet. # CHAPTER \| FEATS Qi Se rs a o o irr} 4. IN THE sKIE: # 22 Monteiro difference between success and failure for adventurers. This chapter provides rules and prices for weapons, armor, and other kinds of equip- ment that characters might purchase or find. The DM lets you know if a shop has an item for sale and whether it's available at the listed price. COINS Characters often find coins on their adventures and can spend those coins in shops, inns, and other businesses. Coins come in different denominations based on the relative worth of their material. The Coin Values table lists coins and how much they're worth relative to the Gold Piece, which is the game's main coin. For example, 100 Copper Pieces are worth 1 Gold Piece. A coin weighs about a third of an ounce, so fifty coins weigh a pound. # T He Right Equipment Can Make The Coin VALUES Coin Value in GP Copper Piece (CP) 1/100 Silver Piece (SP) 1/10 Electrum Piece (EP) 1/2 Gold Piece (GP) 1 Platinum Piece (PP) 10 WEAPONS The Weapons table in this section shows the game's main weapons. The table lists the cost and weight of each weapon, as well as the following details: Category. Every weapon falls into a category: Sim- ple or Martial. Weapon proficiencies are usually tied to one of these categories. For example, you might have proficiency with Simple weapons. Melee or Ranged. A weapon is classified as either Melee or Ranged. A Melee weapon is used to attack a target within 5 feet, whereas a Ranged weapon is used to attack at a greater distance. --- ae SELLING EQUIPMENT Equipment fetches half its cost when sold. In con- trast, trade goods and valuables---like gems and art objects---retain their full val place. The Dungeon Master's Guid magic iterns. Damage. The table lists the amount of damage a weapon deals when an attacker hits with it as well as the type of that damage. Properties. Any properties a weapon has are listed in the Properties column. Each property is defined in the "Properties" section. Mastery. Each weapon has a mastery property, which is defined in the "Mastery Properties" sec- tion later in this chapter. To use that property, you must have a feature that lets you use it. # Weapon Proficiency Anyone can wield a weapon, but you must have proficiency with it to add your Proficiency Bonus to an attack roll you make with it. A player character's features can provide weapon proficiencies. A mon- ster is proficient with any weapon in its stat block. PROPERTIES Here are definitions of the properties in the Proper- ties column of the Weapons table. AMMUNITION You can use a weapon that has the Ammunition property to make a ranged attack only if you have ammunition to fire from it. The type of ammunition required is specified with the weapon's range. Each attack expends one piece of ammunition. Drawing the ammunition is part of the attack (you need a free hand to load a one-handed weapon). After a fight, you can spend 1 minute to recover half the ammunition (round down) you used in the fight; the rest is lost. FINESSE When making an attack with a Finesse weapon, use your choice of your Strength or Dexterity modifier for the attack and damage rolls. You must use the same modifier for both rolls. HEAVY You have Disadvantage on attack rolls with a Heavy weapon if it's a Melee weapon and your Strength score isn't at least 13 or if it's a Ranged weapon and your Dexterity score isn't at least 13. LIGHT When you take the Attack action on your turn and attack with a Light weapon, you can make one extra attack as a Bonus Action later on the same turn. That extra attack must be made with a different # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT { 213 i \_ IMPROVISED WEAPONS Ifyou use an object---such as a table leg, frying pan, or bottle---as a makeshift weapon, see Im- provised Weapons" in the rules glossary. Also see those rules if you wield a weapon in an unusual way, such as using a Ranged weapon to make a melee attack. --- Light weapon, and you don't add your ability mod- ifier to the extra attack's damage unless that modi- fier is negative. For example, you can attack with a Shortsword in one hand and a Dagger in the other using the Attack action and a Bonus Action, but you don't add your Strength or Dexterity modifier to the damage roll of the Bonus Action unless that modi- fier is negative. LOADING You can fire only one piece of ammunition from a Loading weapon when you use an action, a Bonus Action, or a Reaction to fire it, regardless of the number of attacks you can normally make. RANGE A Range weapon has a range in parentheses after the Ammunition or Thrown property. The range lists two numbers. The first is the weapon's normal range in feet, and the second is the weapon's long range. When attacking a target beyond normal range, you have Disadvantage on the attack roll. You can't attack a target beyond the long range. REACH A Reach weapon adds 5 feet to your reach when you attack with it, as well as when determining your reach for Opportunity Attacks with it. THROWN Ifa weapon has the Thrown property, you can throw the weapon to make a ranged attack, and you can draw that weapon as part of the attack. If the weapon is a Melee weapon, use the same ability modifier for the attack and damage rolls that you use for a melee attack with that weapon. Two-HANDED A Two-Handed weapon requires two hands when you attack with it. VERSATILE A Versatile weapon can be used with one or two hands. A damage value in parentheses appears with the property. The weapon deals that damage when used with two hands to make a melee attack. # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT MASTERY PROPERTIES \| Each weapon has a mastery property, which is usable only by a character who has a feature, such as Weapon Mastery, that unlocks the property for the character. The properties are defined below. CLEAVE If you hit a creature with a melee attack roll using this weapon, you can make a melee attack roll with the weapon against a second creature within 5 feet of the first that is also within your reach. On a hit, the second creature takes the weapon's damage, but don't add your ability modifier to that damage unless that modifier is negative. You can make this extra attack only once per turn. GRAZE If your attack roll with this weapon misses a crea- ture, you can deal damage to that creature equal to the ability modifier you used to make the attack roll. This damage is the same type dealt by the weapon, and the damage can be increased only by increasing the ability modifier. Nick When you make the extra attack of the Light prop- erty, you can make it as part of the Attack action in- stead of as a Bonus Action. You can make this extra attack only once per turn. Pusu If you hit a creature with this weapon, you can push the creature up to 10 feet straight away from your- self if it is Large or smaller. Sap If you hit a creature with this weapon, that creature has Disadvantage on its next attack roll before the start of your next turn. SLow If you hit a creature with this weapon and deal damage to it, you can reduce its Speed by 10 feet un- til the start of your next turn. If the creature is hit more than once by weapons that have this property, the Speed reduction doesn't exceed 10 feet. TOPPLE If you hit a creature with this weapon, you can force the creature to make a Constitution saving throw (DC 8 plus the ability modifier used to make the attack roll and your Proficiency Bonus). Ona failed save, the creature has the Prone condition. VEX If you hit a creature with this weapon and deal damage to the creature, you have Advantage on your next attack roll against that creature before the end of your next turn. ee WEAPONS Name Damage Properties Mastery Weight Goat simple Melee /eapons Club 1d4 Bludgeoning Light Slow. 2Ib. TSP Dagger 1d4 Piercing Finesse, Light, Thrown (Range 20/60) Nick 1b. 2cGP Greatclub 1d8 Bludgeoning Two-Handed Push 10 Ib. 2SP Handaxe 1d6 Slashing Light, Thrown (Range 20/60) iy Vex 2lb. SGP Javelin 1d6 Piercing Thrown (Range 30/120) Slow 2 Ib. 5SP Light Hammer 1d4 Bludgeoning Light, Thrown (Range 20/60) Nick 2lb. 2cP Mace 1d6 Bludgeoning --- Sap 4lb. SCP Quarterstaff 1d6 Bludgeoning Versatile (1d8) Topple 4`\b.`{=tex} 2sP Sickle 1d4 Slashing Light Nick 2`\b.`{=tex} 1cP Spear 1d6 Piercing Thrown (Range 20/60), Versatile (1d8) Sap 3lb. 1GP simple Ranged Weapons Dart 1d4 Piercing Finesse, Thrown (Range 20/60) Vex 1/4 Ib. scp Light Crossbow *1d8 Piercing Ammunition (Range 80/320; Bolt), Loading, Slow Sib. 25GP Two-Handed Shortbow 1d6 Piercing Ammunition (Range 80/320; Arrow), Two-Handed Vex 2`\b.`{=tex} 25GP Sling 1d4 Bludgeoning Ammunition (Range 30/120; Bullet) Slow --- 1SP Martial Melee Weapons Battleaxe 1d8 Slashing Versatile (1410) Topple 4`\lb`{=tex}. 10GP Flail 1d8 Bludgeoning --- Sap 2lb. 10GP Glaive 1d10 Slashing Heavy, Reach, Two-Handed Graze 6lb. 20GP Greataxe 1d12 Slashing Heavy, Two-Handed Cleave 7`\b.`{=tex} 30GP Greatsword 2d6 Slashing Heavy, Two-Handed Graze 6lb. SOGP Halberd 1d10 Slashing Heavy, Reach, Two-Handed Cleave 6lb. 20GP Lance 1d10 Piercing Heavy, Reach, Two-Handed (unless mounted) Topple 6lb. 10GP Longsword 1d8 Slashing Versatile (1d10) Sap 3lb. 15GP Maul 2d6 Bludgeoning Heavy, Two-Handed Topple 10 lb. 10GP Morningstar 1d8 Piercing* Sap 4lb. 15GP Pike 1d10 Piercing Heavy, Reach, Two-Handed Push 18 Ib. 5 GP Rapier 1d8 Piercing Finesse Vex 2b. 25 GP Scimitar 1d6 Slashing Finesse, Light Nick 3lb. 25GP Shortsword 1d6 Piercing Finesse, Light Vex 2`\b.`{=tex} 10GP Trident 1d8 Piercing Thrown (Range 20/60), Versatile (1d10) Topple 4lb. SGP Warhammer 1d8 Bludgeoning Versatile (1d10) Push Sib. 15GP War Pick 1d8 Piercing Versatile (1d10) Sap 2lb. SGP Whip 1d4 Slashing Finesse, Reach Slow 3lb. 2GP Martial Ranged Weapons Blowgun 1 Piercing Ammunition (Range 25/100; Needle), Loading Vex 1b. 10GP Hand Crossbow 1d6 Piercing Ammunition (Range 30/120; Bolt), Light, Loading Vex 3lb. 75 GP Heavy Crossbow 1d10 Piercing Ammunition (Range 100/400; Bolt), Heavy, Load- Push 18lb. 50GP ing, Two-Handed Longbow 1d8 Piercing Ammunition (Range 150/600; Arrow), Heavy, Slow 2lb. 50GP Two-Handed Musket 1d12 Piercing Ammunition (Range 40/120; Bullet), Loading, Slow 10 lb. 500 GP Two-Handed Pistol 1d10 Piercing © Ammunition (Range 30/90; Bullet), Loading Vex 3lb. 250 GP 215 \| {\| WEAPONS 5 --- \_ \_ on a = \_ \| SrmpLE MELEE WEAPONS \| Liowt Hammer SickLe \ 2GP 1GP \| Hl i Crus 1SP \| \|\ Hanoaxe \| \ GP \| QuaRTERSTAFF i! 25P: DacceR as Mace \GP \| JAVELIN Lae 5 SP 1GP » Grearcius 2SP \| SIMPLE RANGED WEAPONS a \| Darr 5 cP! SLING C 15P Licht Crosssow 25 GP Svortbow # 25 Gp BarrLeaxe 10 GP Haveero 20GP sGP Grearaxe 30 GP Greatsworo 50GP H\] | Shortsworo Morninesrar \| \ GP 15GP \] } Rapier ' =) # 25 Gp # Trioent 5 Gp Scimitar 25 GP } `\t W`{=tex}ar Pick \| \GP i} \] { 1f } lf it I} it ` |`{=tex} i WarHammer tk { \| # Martial Ranged Weapons Browoun 10 GP Hano Crosssow Musker 15 GP # 500 Gp Loncsow 50 GP Heavy Crosssow 50 GP: \| Pistor 250 GP \_\_ CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT 'Lara 218 \[ \| LIGHT ARMOR } \| \|\| Stuoveo LeatHER # Armor 45 Gp Learner Armor 10 GP {\| Paoveo ARMOR \| sce Scare Mair 50 GP Hioe Armor 10 GP. Hace Prare \| ARMOR 7150 GP } \| \| Cuain Sint 50 GP Breastprare 4oo GP Puate Armor 1,500 GP. Crain Mait 15 GP RinG Mai Sp.int Armor 30GP 200 GP # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT a = ARMOR Armor Armor Class (AC) Strength Stealth Weight ek We Light Armor (1 Minute to Don or Doff) a } Padded Armor 11 + Dex modifier hot Disadvantage 8 Ib. 5 GP Leather Armor 11+ Dex modifier a x iol. enter Studded Leather Armor --- 12 + Dex modifier = a 1B Ib 45 GP i Medium Armor (5 Minutes to Don and 1 Minute to iDof)n \] Hide Armor 12+ Dex modifier (max2) --- = 12Ib. --- 10GP iW Chain Shirt 13 + Dex modifier (max 2) = --- = 20 Ib. 50 GP ANY Scale Mail 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) --- Disadvantage 45`\lb`{=tex}. SOGP My, Breastplate 14 + Dex modifier (max 2) = --- = 20 lb. 400GP H Half Plate Armor 15 + Dex modifier (max 2) = Disadvantage 40 \|b. 750 GP \| \| Heavy Armor (10 Minutes to Don and 5 Minutes to Doff) \| \| Ring Mail 14 *--- Disadvantage 40 Ib. 30 GP 1\| Chain Mail 16 Str 13 Disadvantage 55 Ib. 75 GP \| Splint Armor 7 Str 15 Disadvantage 60lb. 200GP \| Plate Armor 18 Str 15 Disadvantage 65 lb. 1,500 GP Shield\ Shield +2 --- - 6 lb. 10 GP ARMOR LicuT, MEDIUM, OR Heavy ARMOR The Armor table lists the game's main armor. The ne wee ec aaa OF Heavy armor and ' table includes the cost and weight of armor, as well Beene Mae ie, youhave Disadvantage onany) } the following details: D20 Test that involves Strength or Dexterity, and igs you can't cast spells. ' Category. Every type of armor falls into a category: Light, Medium, or Heavy. The category deter- SHIELD mines how long it takes to don or doff the armor You gain the Armor Class benefit of a Shield only if ' (as shown in the table). you have training with it. Armor Class (AC). The table's Armor Class column tells you what your base AC is when you wear a ONE aT A TIME type of armor. For example, if you wear Leather A creature can wear only one suit of armor at a Armor, your base AC is 11 plus your Dexterity time and wield only one Shield at a time. modifier, whereas your AC is 16 in Chain Mail. =* Strength. If the table shows a Strength score in the VARIANT: EQUIPMENT SIZES Strength column for an armor type, that armor reduces the wearer's speed by 10 feet unless the wearer has a Strength score equal to or higher than the listed score. Stealth. If the table shows "Disadvantage" in the Stealth column for an armor type, the wearer has Disadvantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. In most campaigns, you can use or wear any equipment that you find on your adventures, within the bounds of common sense. For ex- ample, an orc adventurer won't fit in a halfling's Leather Armor, and a cloud giant's robe would be far too large for a gnome. The DM can impose more realism. For example, a suit of Plate Armor made for one human might ARMOR TRAM INING not fit another one without significant alterations, Anyone can don armor or hold a Shield, but only and a guard's uniform might be visibly ill-fitting those with training can use them effectively, as ex- when an adventurer tries to wear it as adisguise. plained below. A character's class and other features Using this variant, when adventurers find ar- } determine the character's armor training. A mon- mor, clothing, and similar items that: are madeto } ster has training with any armor in its stat block. be worn, they might need to vi visit } a leatherworker, or a similar € item wearable, The cost percent of the market price of 'the item.; \| SS # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT 219 = --------------------------- SO me SS --------- ce TOOLS A tool helps you make specialized ability checks, craft certain items, or both. A tool's description includes the tool's cost and weight, as well as the following entries: Ability. This entry lists the ability to use when making an ability check with the tool. Utilize. This entry lists things you can do with the tool when you take the Utilize action. You can do one of those things each time you take the action. This entry also provides the DC for the action. Craft. This entry lists what, if anything, you can craft with the tool. For crafting rules, see "Craft- ing Equipment" later in the chapter. Variants. This entry appears if the tool has vari- ants, which are listed. Each requires a separate proficiency. # Tool Proficiency If you have proficiency with a tool, add your Pro- ficiency Bonus to any ability check you make that uses the tool. If you have proficiency in a skill that's used with that check, you have Advantage on the check too. Your features might give you proficiency with a tool. A monster has proficiency with any tool in its stat block. # Artisan's Tools Artisan's Tools are each focused on crafting items and pursuing a trade. Each of these tools requires a separate proficiency. a ALCHEMIST's SuPPLIEs (50 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 8 Ib. Utilize: Identify a substance (DC 15), or start a fire (DC 15) Craft: Acid, Alchemist's Fire, Component Pouch, Oil, Paper, Perfume o a ate BREWER'S SupPLies (20 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 9 Ib. Utilize: Detect poisoned drink (DC 15), or identify al- CARPENTER'S TOOLS (8 GP) Ability: Strength Weight: 6 lb. Utilize: Seal or pry open a door or container (DC 20) Craft: Club, Greatclub, Quarterstaff, Barrel, Chest, Ladder, Pole, Portable Ram, Torch CARTOGRAPHER'S TOOLS (15 GP) Ability: Wisdom Weight: 6 Ib. Utilize: Draft a map of a small area (DC 15) Craft: Map CossBLer's Toots (5 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 5 Ib. Utilize: Modify footwear to give Advantage on the wearer's next Dexterity (Acrobatics) check (DC 10) Craft: Climber's Kit Coox's UTENSILS (1 GP) Ability: Wisdom Weight: 8 Ib. Utilize: Improve food's flavor (DC 10), or detect spoiled or poisoned food (DC 15) Craft: Rations GLASSsBLOWER's TOOLS (30 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 5 Ib. Utilize: Discern what a glass object held in the past 24 hours (DC 15) Craft: Glass Bottle, Magnifying Glass, Spyglass, Vial JEWELER's TooLs (25 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 2 Ib. cohol (Dc 10) Utilize: Discern a gem's value (DC 15) Craft: Antitoxin Craft: Arcane Focus, Holy Symbol aa \<= fo = aes \_ CALLIGRAPHER'S Supptizs (10 GP) Ability: Dexterity ight: 5 Ib. LEATHERWORKER'S TOOLS (5 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 5 lo. Utilize: Add a design to a leather item (DC 10) Craft: Sling, Whip, Hide Armor, Leather Armor, Stud- ded Leather Armor, Backpack, Crossbow Bolt Case, Map or Scroll Case, Parchment, Pouch, Quiver, W: ------= Mason's TOOLS a0 GP) Ability: Strength Weight: 8 Ib. Utilize: Chisel a symbol or hole in stone (DC 10) Craft: Block and Tackle PAINTER'S SUPPLIES (10 GP) Ability: Wisdom Weight: 5 Ib. Utilize: Paint a recognizable image of something you've seen (DC 10) Craft: Druidic Focus, Holy Symbol PoTTER's TOOLS (10 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 3 Ib. Utilize: Discern what a ceramic object held in the past 24 hours (DC 15) Craft: Jug, Lamp SmiTH's TOOLs (20 GP) Ability: Strength Weight: 8 Ib. Utilize: Pry open a door or container (DC 20) Craft: Any Melee weapon (except Club, Greatclub, Quarterstaff, and Whip), Medium armor (except Hide), Heavy armor, Ball Bearings, Bucket, Caltrops, Chain, Crowbar, Firearm Bullets, Grappling Hook, Iron Pot, Iron Spikes, Sling Bullets TinkEr's TOOLs (50 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 10 Ib. Utilize: Assemble a Tiny item composed of scrap, which falls apart in 1 minute (DC 20) Craft: Musket, Pistol, Bell, Bullseye Lantern, Flask, Hooded Lantern, Hunting Trap, Lock, Manacles, Mirror, Shovel, Signal Whistle, Tinderbox WEAVER'S TOOLS (1 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 5 Ib. Utilize: Mend a tear in clothing (DC 10), or sew a Tiny design (DC 10) Craft: Padded Armor, Basket, Bedroll, Blanket, Fine Clothes, Net, Robe, Rope, Sack, String, Tent, Travel- er's Clothes Woopcarver's TOOLs (1 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 5 Ib. Utilize: Carve a pattern in wood (DC 10) Craft: Club, Greatclub, Quarterstaff, Ranged weapons (except Pistol, Musket, and Sling), Arcane Focus, Ar- rows, Bolts, Druidic Focus, Ink Pen, Needles oe OTHER TOOLs These tools support adventure and other pursuits. Discutse Kit (25 GP) Ability: Charisma Weight: 3 Ib. Utilize: Apply makeup (DC 10) Craft: Costume Forcery Kirt (15 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 5 Ib. Utilize: Mimic 10 or fewer words of someone else's handwriting (DC 15), or duplicate a wax seal (DC 20) Gaminc SET (VarIEs) Ability: Wisdom Weight: --- Utilize: Discern whether someone is cheating (DC 10), or win the game (DC 20) Variants: Dice (1 SP), dragonchess (1 GP), playing cards (5 SP), three-dragon ante (1 GP) HERBALISM Kirt (5 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 3 Ib. Utilize: Identify a plant (DC 10) Craft: Antitoxin, Candle, Healer's Kit, Potion of Healing MUSICAL INSTRUMENT (VARIES) Ability: Charisma Weight: Varies Utilize: Play a known tune (DC 10), or improvise a song (DC 15) Variants: Bagpipes (30 GP, 6 Ib.), drum (6 GP, 3 Ib.), dulcimer (25 GP, 10 Ib.), flute (2 GP, 1 Ib.), horn (3 GP, 2 Ib.), lute (35 GP, 2 Ib,), lyre (30 GP, 2 Ib.), pan flute (12 GP, 2 Ib.), shawm (2 GP, 1 Ib.), viol (30 GP, 1b) Navicator's Toots (25 GP) Ability: Wisdom Weight: 2 Ib. Utilize: Plot a course (DC 10), or determine position by stargazing (DC 15) Porsoner's Kit (50 GP) Ability: Intelligence Weight: 2 Ib. Utilize: Detect a poisoned object (DC 10) Craft: Basic Poison Tuleves' Toots (25 GP) Ability: Dexterity Weight: 1 Ib. Utilize: Pick a lock (DC 15), or disarm a trap (DC 15) # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT 221 # Adventuring Gear The Adventuring Gear table in this section includes gear that adventurers often find useful. These items are described here in alphabetical order, with an item's price appearing after its name. Acip (25 GP) When you take the Attack action, you can replace one of your attacks with throwing a vial of Acid. Target one creature or object you can see within 20 feet of yourself. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexterity modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or take 2d6 Acid damage. ALCHEMIST's FrrE (50 GP) When you take the Attack action, you can replace one of your attacks with throwing a flask of Alche- mist's Fire. Target one creature or object you can see within 20 feet of yourself. The target must suc- ceed on a Dexterity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexterity modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or take 1d4 Fire damage and start burning (see the rules glossary). # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT A WARLOCK CHANNELS MaGiC THROUGH AN Arcane Focus. AMMUNITION (VARIES) Ammunition is required by a weapon that has the Ammunition property. A weapon's description spec- ifies the type of ammunition used by the weapon. The Ammunition table lists the different types and the amount you get when you buy them. The table also lists the item that is typically used to store each type; storage must be bought separately. AMMUNITION Type Amount Storage Weight Cost Arrows 20 Quiver 1lb. 1GP Bolts 20 Case 1' lb. 1GP Bullets, Firearm 10 Pouch 2`\lb`{=tex}. 3GP Bullets, Sling 20 Pouch J'lb, 4CP Needles 50 Pouch 1lb. 1GP ANTITOXIN (50 GP) As a Bonus Action, you can drink a vial of Antitoxin to gain Advantage on saving throws to avoid or end the Poisoned condition for 1 hour. ADVENTURING GEAR Item Weight Cost es Acid 1Ib. 25GP. 'Ink Pen esi oe Alchemist's Fire 1 Ib. 50 GP Jug Alb. 2cP Ammunition Varies Varies Ladder 25 Ib. isp Antitoxin eS Lemp lib SSP Arcane Focus Varies Varies 'Lantern, Bullseye 2`\b.`{=tex} 10 GP Backpack 5 Ib. 2GP Lantern, Hooded 2Ib. 5GP Ball Bearings 2 Ib. 1GP Lock 1Ib 10GP Barrel 70 Ib. 2GP Magnifying Glass --- 100GP Basket 2 Ib. 4sp Manacles 6 lb. 2GP Bedroll 7 Ib. 1GP Map ae, 1GP Bell = 1GP Mirror W/2Ib. 5GP Blanket 3 Ib. 5 SP Net 3 \|b. 1GP Block and Tackle 5 \|b. 1GP Oil 1b. 1SP Book 5 lb. 25 GP Paper =) 2SP Bottle, Glass 2 Ib. 2GP Parchment = 1SP Bucket 2 Ib. 5 CP Perfume --- 5GP Burglar's Pack 42 \|b. 16 GP Poison, Basic --- 100GP Caltrops 2b. 1GP Pole 7b. 5cP Candle = 1cP Pot, Iron 10 Ib. 2GP Case, Crossbow Bolt Tb. 1GP Potion of Healing 1/2lb. = 50GP 4 Case, Map or Scroll 1 lb. 1GP Pouch Tb. 5SP- Chain 10 Ib. SGP Priest's Pack 29 \|b. 33 GP Chest 25 \|b. 5 GP Quiver 1 Ib. 1GP Climber's Kit 12Ib. --- 25GP Ram, Portable 35 Ib. 4GP £. Clothes, Fine 6lb. --- 15GP Rations 2Ib. SSP Clothes, Traveler's 4lb. 2GP Robe 4lb. 1GP Component Pouch 2b. = 25GP Rope Sb. 1GP\_ Costume 4b. 5 GP Sack 172 Ib. 1CP aa Crowbar 5Ib. 2GP Scholar's Pack 22Ib. 40GP Diplomat's Pack 39lb. 39GP Shovel 5 lb. Druidic Focus Varies Varies Signal Whistle Dungeoneer's Pack SSlb. = 12. GP Spell Scroll (Cantrip) *Entertainer's Pack 582lb. 40GP Spell Scroll (Level 1) --- Explorer's Pack 55lb. = 10 GP Spikes, Iron Sb. Flask Tb. 2CP Spyglass Tb. 1,000 GP 'is Grappling Hook 4b. 2GP String* 1SP Healer's Kit 3Ib = SGP Tent Erie \> \_ Holy Symbol Varies Varies 'Tinderbox Tb. Holy Water 'Vib. 25GP Torch ee Hunting Trap 25 \|b. SGP Vial ARCANE Focus (VARIES) An Arcane Focus takes one of the forms in the Arcane Focuses table and is bejeweled or carved to channel Arcane magic. A Sorcerer, Warlock, or Wiz- ard can use such an item as a Spellcasting Focus. # Arcane Focuses Focus Weight Cost Crystal 1 Ib. 10 GP Orb 3 Ib. 20 GP Rod 2 Ib. 10 GP Staff (also a Quarterstaff) 4 \|b. 5 GP Wand Tb. 10 GP BACKPACK (2 GP) A Backpack holds up to 30 pounds within 1 cubic foot. It can also serve as a saddlebag. BALL BEARINGS (1 GP) As a Utilize action, you can spill Ball Bearings from their pouch. They spread to cover a level, 10-foot- square area within 10 feet of yourself. A creature that enters this area for the first time on a turn must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition. It takes 10 minutes to recover the Ball Bearings. BARREL (2 GP) A Barrel holds up to 40 gallons of liquid or up to 4 cubic feet of dry goods. Basket (4 SP) A Basket holds up to 40 pounds within 2 cubic feet. BEDROLL (1 GP) A Bedroll sleeps one Small or Medium creature. While in a Bedroll, you automatically succeed on saving throws against extreme cold (see the Dun- geon Master's Guide). BELL (1 GP) When rung as a Utilize action, a Bell produces a sound that can be heard up to 60 feet away. BLANKET (5 SP) While wrapped in a blanket, you have Advantage on saving throws against extreme cold (see the Dun- geon Master's Guide). # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT BLOCK AND TACKLE (1 GP) A Block and Tackle allows you to hoist up to four times the weight you can normally lift. Book (25 GP) A Book contains fiction or nonfiction. If you consult an accurate nonfiction Book about its topic, you gain a +5 bonus to Intelligence (Arcana, History, Na- ture, or Religion) checks you make about that topic. Bott e, Grass (2 GP) A Glass Bottle holds up to 1% pints. Bucket (5 CP) A Bucket holds up to half a cubic foot of contents. Burctar's Pack (16 GP) A Burglar's Pack contains the following items: Backpack, Ball Bearings, Bell, 10 Candles, Crowbar, Hooded Lantern, 7 flasks of Oil, 5 days of Rations, Rope, Tinderbox, and Waterskin. Catrrops (1 GP) As a Utilize action, you can spread Caltrops from their bag to cover a 5-foot-square area within 5 feet of yourself. A creature that enters this area for the first time on a turn must succeed on a DC 15 Dexterity saving throw or take 1 Piercing damage and have its Speed reduced to O until the start of its next turn. It takes 10 minutes to recover the Caltrops. CANDLE (1 CP) For 1 hour, a lit Candle sheds Bright Light in a 5-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 5 feet. Case, Crosssow Bott (1 GP) A Crossbow Bolt Case holds up to 20 Bolts. Case, MAP or ScroLt (1 GP) A Map or Scroll Case holds up to 10 sheets of paper or 5 sheets of parchment. Cuain (5 GP) As a Utilize action, you can wrap a Chain around an unwilling creature within 5 feet of yourself that has the Grappled, Incapacitated, or Restrained condi- tion if you succeed on a DC 13 Strength (Athletics) = check. If the creature's legs are bound, the creature has the Restrained condition until it escapes. Es- caping the Chain requires the creature to makea successful DC 18 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check as an action. Bursting the Chain requires a successful DC 20 Strength (Athletics) check as an action. Cuest (5 GP) A Chest holds up to 12 cubic feet of contents. Curmser's Kit (25 GP) AClimber's Kit includes boot tips, gloves, pitons, and a harness. As a Utilize action, you can use the Climber's Kit to anchor yourself; when you do, you can't fall more than 25 feet from the anchor point, and you can't move more than 25 feet from there without undoing the anchor as a Bonus Action. CLOTHES, FINE (15 GP) Fine Clothes are made of expensive fabrics and adorned with expertly crafted details. Some events and locations admit only people wearing these clothes. CLOTHES, TRAVELER'S (2 GP) Traveler's Clothes are resilient garments designed for travel in various environments. CoMPONENT Poucu (25 GP) A Component Pouch is watertight and filled with compartments that hold all the free Material com- ponents of your spells. CostumE (5 GP) While wearing a Costume, you have Advantage on any ability check you make to impersonate the per- son or type of person it represents. CrowBar (2 GP) Using a Crowbar gives you Advantage on Strength checks where the Crowbar's leverage can be applied. DirLomat's Pack (39 GP) A Diplomat''s Pack contains the following items: Chest, Fine Clothes, Ink, 5 Ink Pens, Lamp, 2 Map or Scroll Cases, 4 flasks of Oil, 5 sheets of Paper, 5 sheets of Parchment, Perfume, and Tinderbox. Druivic Focus (VariEs) A Druidic Focus takes one of the forms in the Dru- idic Focuses table and is carved, tied with ribbon, or painted to channel primal magic. A Druid or Ranger can use such an object as a Spellcasting Focus. Druipic Focuses Focus Weight Cost Sprig of mistletoe --- 1GP Wooden staff (also a Quarterstaff) 4lb. 5GP Yew wand 1lb. 10GP DUNGEONEER'S Pack (12 GP) A Dungeoneer's Pack contains the following items: Backpack, Caltrops, Crowbar, 2 flasks of Oil, 10 days of Rations, Rope, Tinderbox, 10 Torches, and Waterskin. ENTERTAINER'S Pack (40 GP) An Entertainer's Pack contains the following items: Backpack, Bedroll, Bell, Bullseye Lantern, 3 Cos- tumes, Mirror, 8 flasks of Oil, 9 days of Rations, Tinderbox, and Waterskin. ExpLorer's Pack (10 GP) An Explorer's Pack contains the following items: Backpack, Bedroll, 2 flasks of Oil, 10 days of Ra- tions, Rope, Tinderbox, 10 Torches, and Waterskin. FLASK (2 CP) A Flask holds up to 1 pint. GrappLinc Hook (2 GP) Asa Utilize action, you can throw the Grappling Hook at a railing, a ledge, or another catch within 50 feet of yourself, and the hook catches on if you succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity (Acrobatics) check. If you tied a Rope to the hook, you can then climb it. HEA.Er's Kit (5 GP) A Healer's Kit has ten uses. As a Utilize action, you can expend one of its uses to stabilize an Uncon- scious creature that has 0 Hit Points without need- ing to make a Wisdom (Medicine) check. # CHAPTER \| EQUIPMENT # ------ 7 aes SS Sait A A AO ee ne Hoty SyMBOL (VARIES) 4 A Holy Symbol takes one of the forms in the Holy Symbol table and is bejeweled or painted to channel divine magic. A Cleric or Paladin can use a Holy Symbol as a Spellcasting Focus. The table indicates whether a Holy Symbol needs to be held, worn, or borne on fabric (such as a tab- ard or banner) or a Shield. Ho ty SYMBOLS Symbol Weight Cost Amulet (worn or held) 1lb. 5 GP Emblem (borne on fabric or a Shield) --- 5GP Reliquary (held) 2`\b.`{=tex} 5GP Hoty WaTER (25 GP) When you take the Attack action, you can replace one of your attacks with throwing a flask of Holy Water. Target one creature you can see within 20 feet of yourself. The target must succeed on a Dex- terity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexterity mod- ifier and Proficiency Bonus) or take 2d8 Radiant damage if it is a Fiend or an Undead. HuntTInc Trap (5 GP) As a Utilize action, you can set a Hunting Trap, which is a sawtooth steel ring that snaps shut when a creature steps on a pressure plate in the center. The trap is affixed by a heavy chain to an immo- bile object, such as a tree or a spike driven into the ground. A creature that steps on the plate must succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity saving throw or take 1d4 Piercing damage and have its Speed reduced to O until the start of its next turn. Thereafter, until the creature breaks free of the trap, its movement is limited by the length of the chain (typically 3 feet). A creature can use its action to make a DC 13 Strength (Athletics) check, freeing itself or an- other creature within its reach on a success. Each failed check deals 1 Piercing damage to the trapped ay "creature. ( Inx (10 GP) Ink comes in a l-ounce bottle, which provides enough ink to write about 500 pages. Juc (2 CP) A Jug holds up to 1 gallon. LappeEr (1 SP) A Ladder is 10 feet tall. You must climb to move up or down it. Lamp (5 SP) A Lamp burns Oil as fuel to cast Bright Light in a 15-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet. LANTERN, BULLSEYE (10 GP) A Bullseye Lantern burns Oil as fuel to cast Bright Light in a 60-foot Cone and Dim Light for an addi- tional 60 feet. LANTERN, Hoopep (5 GP) A Hooded Lantern burns Oil as fuel to cast Bright Light in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an ad- ditional 30 feet. As a Bonus Action, you can lower the hood, reducing the light to Dim Light in a 5-foot radius, or raise it again. Lock (10 GP) A Lock comes with a key. Without the key, a crea- ture can use Thieves' Tools to pick this Lock with a successful DC 15 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. Macniryinc Grass (100 GP) A Magnifying Glass grants Advantage on any abil- ity check made to appraise or inspect a highly de- tailed item. Lighting a fire with a Magnifying Glass requires light as bright as sunlight to focus, tinder to ignite, and about 5 minutes for the fire to ignite. SS MANACLEs (2 GP) As a Utilize action, you can use Manacles to bind an unwilling Small or Medium creature within 5 feet of yourself that has the Grappled, Incapacitated, or Restrained condition if you succeed on a DC 13 Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check. While bound, a creature has Disadvantage on attack rolls, and the creature is Restrained if the Manacles are attached to a chain or hook that is fixed in place. Escaping the Manacles requires a successfut Each set 0! Manacles comes with a key. Without --- the key, a creature can use Thieves' Tools to pick the Manacles' lock with a successful DC 15 Dexter- ity (Sleight of Hand) check. Map (1 GP) Ifyou consult an accurate Map, you gain a +5 bonus to Wisdom (Survival) checks you make to find your way in the place represented on it. Mrrror (5 GP) Ahandheld steel Mirror is useful for personal cos- metics but also for peeking around corners and re- flecting light as a signal. Net (1 GP) When you take the Attack action, you can replace one of your attacks with throwing a Net. Target a creature you can see within 15 feet of yourself. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexterity modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or have the Restrained condition until it escapes. The target succeeds automatically if it is Huge or larger. To escape, the target or a creature within 5 feet of it must take an action to make a DC 10 Strength (Athletics) check, freeing the Restrained creature ona success. Destroying the Net (AC 10; 5 HP; Immunity to Bludgeoning, Poison, and Psychic dam- age) also frees the target, ending the effect. Or (1 SP) You can douse a creature, object, or space with Oil or use it as fuel, as detailed below. Dousing a Creature or an Object. When you take the Attack action, you can replace one of your at- tacks with throwing an Oil flask. Target one crea- ture or object within 20 feet of yourself. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexterity modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or be covered in oil. If the target takes Fire damage before the oil dries (after 1 minute), the target takes an extra 5 Fire damage from burning oil. Dousing a Space. You can take the Utilize action to pour an Oil flask on level ground to cover a 5-foot- square area within 5 feet of yourself. If lit, the oil burns until the end of the turn 2 rounds from when the oil was lit (or 12 seconds) and deals 5 Fire dam- age to any creature that enters the area or ends its turn there. A creature can take this damage only once per turn. Fuel. Oil serves as fuel for Lamps and Lanterns. Once lit, a flas. cf Oil burns for 6 hours in a Lamp Zz)