# CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 171 ------------EEe WIZARD SUBCLASSES A Wizard subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Wizard levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Abjurer, Diviner, Evoker, and Illusionist subclasses. ABJURER = ee Shield Companions and Banish Foes Your study of magic is focused on spells that block, banish, or protect---ending harmful effects, ban- ishing evil influences, and protecting the weak. Abjurers are sought when baleful spirits require exorcism, when locations must be guarded against magical spying, and when portals to other planes of existence must be closed. Adventuring parties value Abjurers for the protection they provide against a variety of hostile magic and other attacks. LEVEL 3: ABJURATION SAVANT Choose two Wizard spells from the Abjuration school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to anew level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Abjuration school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots. LEVEL 3: ARCANE WARD You can weave magic around yourself for protec- tion. When you cast an Abjuration spell with a spell slot, you can simultaneously use a strand of the spell's magic to create a magical ward on yourself that lasts until you finish a Long Rest. The ward has a Hit Point maximum equal to twice your Wizard level plus your Intelligence modifier. Whenever you take damage, the ward takes the damage instead, and if you have any Resistances or Vulnerabilities, apply them before reducing the ward's Hit Points. If the damage reduces the ward to O Hit Points, you take any remaining damage. While the ward has 0 Hit Points, it can't absorb damage, but its magic remains, Whenever you cast an Abjuration spell with a spell slot, the ward regains a number of Hit Points equal to twice the level of the spell slot. Alterna- tively, as a Bonus Action, you can expend a spell slot, and the ward regains a number of Hit Points equal to twice the level of the spell slot expended. Once you create the ward, you can't create it again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 6: PROJECTED WARD When a creature that you can see within 30 feet of yourself takes damage, you can take a Reaction to cause your Arcane Ward to absorb that damage. If: this damage reduces the ward to 0 Hit Points, the s --------- warded creature takes any remaining damage. If that creature has any Resistances or Vulnerabilities, apply them before reducing the ward's Hit Points. LEVEL 10: SPELL BREAKER You always have the Counterspell and Dispel Magic spells prepared. In addition, you can cast Dispel Magic as a Bonus Action, and you can add your Pro- ficiency Bonus to its ability check. When you cast either spell with a spell slot, that slot isn't expended if the spell fails to stop a spell. LEVEL 14; SPELL RESISTANCE You have Advantage on saving throws against spells, and you have Resistance to the damage of spells. DIVINER \_: Learn the Secrets of the Multiverse The counsel of a Diviner is sought by those who want a clearer understanding of the past, present, and future. As a Diviner, you strive to part the veils of space, time, and consciousness. You work to master spells of discernment, remote viewing, supernat- ural knowledge, and foresight. LEVEL 3: DIVINATION SAVANT Choose two Wizard spells from the Divination school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to a new level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Divination school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots. LEVEL 3: PORTENT Glimpses of the future begin to press on your awareness. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, roll two d20s and record the numbers rolled. You can replace any D20 Test made by you or a creature that you can see with one of these foretelling rolls. You must choose to do so before the roll, and you can replace a roll in this way only once per turn. Each foretelling roll can be used only once. When you finish a Long Rest, you lose any unused foretell- ing rolls. LEVEL 6: EXPERT DIVINATION Casting Divination spells comes so easily to you that it expends only a fraction of your spellcasting ef- forts. When you cast a Divination spell using a level 2+ spell slot, you regain one expended spell slot. The slot you regain must be of a level lower than the slot you expended and can't be higher than level 5. Levet 10: THe Tuirp Eye You can increase your powers of perception. As a Bonus Action, choose one of the following benefits, which lasts until you start a Short or Long Rest. You can't use this feature again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. Darkvision. You gain Darkvision with a range of 120 feet. Greater Comprehension. You can read any language. See Invisibility. You can cast See Invisibility without expending a spell slot. LEVEL 14: GREATER PORTENT The visions in your dreams intensify and paint a more accurate picture in your mind of what is to come. Roll three d20s for your Portent feature rather than two. Divine Susciass 173 5 EVOKER Create Explosive Elemental Effects Your studies focus on magic that creates powerful elemental effects such as bitter cold, searing flame, rolling thunder, crackling lightning, and burning acid. Some Evokers find employment in military forces, serving as artillery to blast armies from afar. Others use their power to protect others, while some seek their own gain. LEVEL 3: EvVOCATION SAVANT Choose two Wizard spells from the Evocation school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to anew level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Evocation school to your spellbook for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots. LEVEL 3: POTENT CANTRIP Your damaging cantrips affect even creatures that avoid the brunt of the effect. When you cast a can- trip at a creature and you miss with the attack roll or the target succeeds on a saving throw against the cantrip, the target takes half the cantrip's damage (if any) but suffers no additional effect from the cantrip. LEVEL 6: SCULPT SPELLS You can create pockets of relative safety within the effects of your evocations. When you cast an Evocation spell that affects other creatures that you can see, you can choose a number of them equal to 1 plus the spell's level. The chosen creatures automatically succeed on their saving throws against the spell, and they take no damage if they would nor- mally take half damage on a successful save. LeveL 10: EMPOWERED EVOCATION Whenever you cast a Wizard spell from the Evoca- tion school, you can add your Intelligence modifier to one damage roll of that spell. LEVEL 14; OVERCHANNEL You can increase the power of your spells. When you cast a Wizard spell with a spell slot of levels 1-5 that deals damage, you can deal maximum damage with that spell on the turn you cast it. The first time you do so, you suffer no adverse ef- fect. If you use this feature again before you finish a Long Rest, you take 2d12 Necrotic damage for each level of the spell slot immediately after you cast it. This damage ignores Resistance and Immunity. Each time you use this feature again before finish- ing a Long Rest, the Necrotic damage per spell level # increases by 1d12, ILLUSIC:: {ST Weave Subtle Spells of Deception You specialize in magic that dazzles the senses and tricks the mind, and the illusions you craft make the impossible seem real. LEVEL 3: ILLUSION SAVANT Choose two Wizard spells from the Illusion school, each of which must be no higher than level 2, and add them to your spellbook for free. In addition, whenever you gain access to anew level of spell slots in this class, you can add one Wizard spell from the Illusion school to your spell- book for free. The chosen spell must be of a level for which you have spell slots. LEVEL 3: IMPROVED ILLUSIONS You can cast Illusion spells without providing Ver- bal components, and if an Illusion spell you cast has arange of 10+ feet, the range increases by 60 feet. You also know the Minor Illusion cantrip. If you al- ready know it, you learn a different Wizard cantrip of your choice. The cantrip doesn't count against your number of cantrips known. You can create both a sound and an image with a single casting of Minor Illusion, and you can cast it as a Bonus Action. LEVEL 6: PHANTASMAL CREATURES You always have the Summon Beast and Summon Fey spells prepared. Whenever you cast either spell, you can change its school to Illusion, which causes the summoned creature to appear spectral. You can cast the Illusion version of each spell without expending a spell slot, but casting it without a slot halves the creature's Hit Points. Once you cast either spell without a spell slot, you must finish a Long Rest before you can cast the spell in that way again. LeveL 10: ILLusory SELF When a creature hits you with an attack roll, you can take a Reaction to interpose an illusory dupli- cate of yourself between the attacker and yourself. The attack automatically misses you, then the illu- sion dissipates. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. You can also restore your use of it by expending a level 2+ spell slot (no action required). LevEL 14: ILLUSORY REALITY You have learned to weave shadow magic into your illusions to give them a semi-reality. When you cast an Illusion spe!l with a spell slot, you can choose one inanimate, nonmagical object that is part of the illusion and make that object real. You can do this on your tur: a5 a Bonus Action while the spell is on- going. The ot remains real for 1 minute, during which it can': deal damage or give any conditions. For exampie, vou can create an illusion of a bridge over a chas™ and then make it real and cross it, ILtusionist Susciass # Chapter 4 # Character Origins ae a HIS CHAPTER DESCRIBES THE TWO i components of an adventurer's origin: back- ground and species. Together, these elements suggest your character's early experience and family origin before taking up the adventuring life and learning the capabilities of a class (described in chapter 3). # Origin Components Each part of your character's origin reflects facets of your character, their life, and the circumstances that started them on the path to adventure. If you choose a background or a species from an older book, see the sidebar "Backgrounds and Spe- cies from Older Books" in chapter 2 for how to use them with the options here. # Character Backgrounds Your character's background is a collection of char- acteristics that represent the place and occupation that were most formative before your character em- barked on a life of adventure. Each background includes a brief narrative of what your character's past might have been like. Al- ter the details of this narrative however you like. PARTS OF A BACKGROUND A background includes the following parts. Ability Scores. A background lists three of your character's ability scores. Increase one by 2 and another one by 1, or increase all three by 1. None of these increases can raise a score above 20. Feat. A background gives your character a speci- fied Origin feat (described in chapter 5). Skill Proficiencies. A background gives your char- acter proficiency in two specified skills. Tool Proficiency. Each background gives a charac- ter proficiency with one tool---either a specific tool or one chosen from the Artisan's Tools category. Tools are detailed in chapter 6. Equipment. Each background offers a choice be- tween a package of equipment and SO GP. The peoples of the D&D multiverse hail from dif- ferent worlds and include many kinds of sapient life forms. A player character's species is the set of game traits that an adventurer gains from being one of those life forms. Some species can trace their origin to a single world, plane of existence, or god, while other spe- cies first appeared in multiple realms at once. What- ever a species' genesis, its members have spread across the multiverse and contribute to many differ- ent cultures. Members of most species live for about 80 years, with exceptions noted in the text about the species in this chapter. Regardless of life span, members of all species reach physical maturity at about the same age. Your character can be any age that isn't beyond their species' normal life span. PARTS OF A SPECIES A species includes the following parts. Creature Type. A character's species determines the character's creature type, which is described in the rules glossary. Every species in this chapter is Humanoid; playable non-Humanoid species appear in other D&D books. Size. Your character's species determines the character's size. Individuals within a species cover a wide range of heights, and some species include such diversity of size that you can choose whether your character is Small or Medium. Speed. Your character's species determines the character's Speed. Special Traits. Each species gives a character special traits---unique characteristics based on the species' physiology or magical nature. When you choose a species, your character gets all the special traits listed for it. Some traits involve making a choice from a handful of options. # Background Descriptions Sixteen backgrounds are presented in this section in alphabetical order: CHARACTER SPECIES Acolyte Guard Sailor Sie: = Artisan Guide Scribe When you nnd your ene oe you Charlatan Hermit Soldier determine My, ether your cl arac er is a human ora Criminal Merchant Wayfarer =\| member of a fantastical species, such as dragonborn ' f Entertainer Noble \* or gnome. 4 Farmer Sage J = # Aracter Origins. ACOLYTE Ability Scores: Intelligence, Wisdom, Charisma Feat: Magic Initiate (Cleric) (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Insight and Religion Tool Proficiency: Calligrapher's Supplies Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Calligrapher's Sup- plies, Book (prayers), Holy Symbol, Parchment (10 sheets), Robe, 8 GP; or (B) 50 GP ARTISAN Ability Scores: Strength, Dexterity, Intelligence Feat: Crafter (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Investigation and Persuasion Tool Proficiency: Choose one kind of Artisan's Tools (see chapter 6) Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Artisan's Tools (same as above), 2 Pouches, Traveler's Clothes, 32 GP; or (B) 50 GP # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS You devoted yourself to service in a temple, either nestled in a town or secluded in a sacred grove. There you performed rites in honor of a god or pantheon. You served under a priest and studied re- ligion. Thanks to your priest's instruction and your own devotion, you also learned how to channel a modicum of divine power in service to your place of worship and the people who prayed there. You began mopping floors and scrubbing count- ers in an artisan's workshop for a few coppers per day as soon as you were strong enough to carry a bucket. When you were old enough to apprentice, you learned to create basic crafts « well as how to sweet-talk the occasi customer. Your trade has also given for detail. 1a keen eye CHARLATAN Ability Scores: Dexterity, Constitution, Charisma Feat: Skilled (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Deception and Sleight of Hand Once you were old enough to order an ale, you soon had a favorite stool in every tavern within ten miles of where you were born. As you traveled the circuit Tool Proficiency: Forgery Kit Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Forgery Kit, Costume, Fine Clothes, 15 GP; or (B) 50 GP from public house to watering hole, you learned to prey on unfortunates who were in the market for a comforting lie or two---perhaps a sham potion or forged ancestry records. CRIMINAL Ability Scores: Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence Feat: Alert (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Sleight of Hand and Stealth Tool Proficiency: Thieves' Tools Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) 2 Daggers, Thieves' Tools, Crowbar, 2 Pouches, Traveler's Clothes, 16 GP; or (B) 50 GP You eked out a living in dark alleyways, cutting purses or burgling shops. Perhaps you were part of a small gang of like-minded wrongdoers who looked out for each other. Or maybe you were a lone wolf, fending for yourself against the local thieves' guild and more fearsome lawbreakers. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS 180 ENTERTAINER Ability Scores: Strength, Dexterity, Charisma Feat: Musician (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics and Performance Tool Proficiency: Choose one kind of Musical Instrument (see chapter 6) Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Musical Instrument (same as above), 2 Costumes, Mirror, Perfume, Traveler's Clothes, 11 GP; or (B) 50 GP FARMER Ability Scores: Strength, Constitution, Wisdom Feat: Tough (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Animal Handling and Nature Tool Proficiency: Carpenter's Tools Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Sickle, Carpenter's Tools, Healer's Kit, Iron Pot, Shovel, Traveler's Clothes, 30 GP; or (B) 50 GP # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS You spent much of your youth following roving fairs and carnivals, performing odd jobs for musi- cians and acrobats in exchange for lessons. You may have learned how to walk a tightrope, how to play a lute in a distinct style, or how to recite poetry with impeccable diction. To this day, you thrive on ap- plause and long for the stage. You grew up close to the land. Years tending ani- mals and cultivating the earth rewarded you with patience and good health. You have a keen apprecia- tion for nature's bounty alongside a healthy respect for nature's wrath. GUARD Ability Scores: Strength, Intelligence, Wisdom Feat: Alert (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Athletics and Perception Tool Proficiency: Choose one kind of Gaming Set (see chapter 6) Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Spear, Light Crossbow, 20 Bolts, Gaming Set (same as above), Hooded Lan- tern, Manacles, Quiver, Traveler's Clothes, 12 GP; or (B) 50 GP Your feet ache when you remember the countless hours you spent at your post in the tower. You were trained to keep one eye looking outside the wall, watching for marauders sweeping from the nearby forest, and your other eye looking inside the wall, searching for cutpurses and troublemakers. Ability Scores: Dexterity, Constitution, Wisdom Feat: Magic Initiate (Druid) (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Stealth and Survival Tool Proficiency: Cartographer's Tools Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Shortbow, 20 Arrows, Cartographer's Tools, Bedroll, Quiver, Tent, Travel- er's Clothes, 3 GP; or (B) 50 GP You came of age outdoors, far from settled lands. Your home was anywhere you chose to spread your bedroll. There are wonders in the wildernessstrange monsters, pristine forests and streams, overgrown ruins of great halls once trod by giants--- and you learned to fend for yourself as you explored them. From time to time, you guided friendly nature priests who instructed you in the fundamentals of channeling the magic of the wild. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS \ 182 HERMIT Ability Scores: Constitution, Wisdom, Charisma Feat: Healer (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Medicine and Religion Tool Proficiency: Herbalism Kit Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Quarterstaff, Herbalism Kit, Bedroll, Book (philosophy), Lamp, Oil (3 flasks), Traveler's Clothes, 16 GP; or (B) 50 GP MERCHANT Ability Scores: Constitution, Intelligence, Charisma Feat: Lucky (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Animal Handling and Persuasion Tool Proficiency: Navigator's Tools Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Navigator's Tools, 2 Pouches, Traveler's Clothes, 22 GP; or (B) 50 GP # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS You spent your early years secluded in a hut or monastery located well beyond the outskirts of the nearest settlement. In those days, your only com- panions were the creatures of the forest and those who would occasionally visit to bring news of the outside world and supplies. The solitude allowed you to spend many hours pondering the mysteries of creation. You were apprenticed to a trader, caravan master, or shopkeeper, learning the fundamentals of com- merce. You traveled broadly, and you earned a liv- ing by buying and selling the raw materials artisans need to practice their craft or finished works from such crafters. You might have transported goods from one place to another (by ship, wagon, or cara- van) or bought them from traveling traders and sold them in your own shop. NOBLE Ability Scores: Strength, Intelligence, Charisma Feat: Skilled (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: History and Persuasion Tool Proficiency: Choose one kind of Gaming Set (see chapter 6) Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Gaming Set (same as above), Fine Clothes, Perfume, 29 GP; or (B) 50 GP You were raised in a castle, surrounded by wealth, power, and privilege. Your family of minor aristo- crats ensured that you received a first-class edu- cation, some of which you appreciated and some of which you resented. Your time in the castle, especially the many hours you spent observing your family at court, also taught you a great deal about leadership. Ability Scores: Constitution, Intelligence, Wisdom Feat: Magic Initiate (Wizard) (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Arcana and History Tool Proficiency: Calligrapher's Supplies Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Quarterstaff, Callig- rapher's Supplies, Book (history), Parchment (8 sheets), », 8 GP; or (B) 50 GP eS You spent your formative years traveling between manors and monasteries, performing various odd jobs and services in exchange for access to their libraries, You whiled away many a long evening studying books and scrolls, learning the lore of the multiverse---even the rudiments of magic---and your mind yearns for more. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS = N # 183 Sailor Ability Scores: Strength, Dexterity, Wisdom Feat: Tavern Brawler (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Acrobatics and Perception Tool Proficiency: Navigator's Tools Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Dagger, Navigator's Tools, Rope, Traveler's Clothes, 20 GP; or (B) 50 GP Ability Scores: Dexterity, Intelligence, Wisdom Feat: Skilled (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Investigation and Perception Tool Proficiency: Calligrapher's Supplies Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Calligrapher's Supplies, Fine Clothes, Lamp, Oil (3 flasks), Parchment (12 sheets), 23 GP; or (B) 50 GP 184. ) CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS You lived as a seafarer, wind at your back and decks swaying beneath your feet. You've perched on bar- stools in more ports of call than you can remember, faced mighty storms, and swapped stories with folk who live beneath the waves. You spent formative years in a scriptorium, a mon- astery dedicated to the preservation of knowledge, or a government agency, where you learned to write with a clear hand and produce finely written texts. Perhaps you scribed government documents or cop- ied tomes of literature. You might have some skill as a writer of poetry, narrative, or scholarly research. Above all, you have a careful attention to detail, helping you avoid introducing mistakes to the docu- ments you copy and create. SOLDIER Ability Scores: Strength, Dexterity, Constitution Feat: Savage Attacker (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Athletics and Intimidation Tool Proficiency: Choose one kind of Gaming Set (see chapter 6) Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) Spear, Shortbow, 20 Arrows, Gaming Set (same as above), Healer's Kit, Quiver, Traveler's Clothes, 14 GP; or (B) # 50 Gp WAYFARER Ability Scores: Dexterity, Wisdom, Charisma Feat: Lucky (see chapter 5) Skill Proficiencies: Insight and Stealth Tool Proficiency: Thieves' Tools Equipment: Choose A or B: (A) 2 Daggers, Thieves' Tools, Gaming Set (any), Bedroll, 2 Pouches, Travel- er's Clothes, 16 GP; or (B) 50 GP You began training for war as soon as you reached adulthood and carry precious few memories of life before you took up arms. Battle is in your blood. Sometimes you catch yourself reflexively perform- ing the basic fighting exercises you learned first. Eventually, you put that training to use on the bat- tlefield, protecting the realm by waging war. You grew up on the streets surrounded by similarly ill-fated castoffs, a few of them friends and a few of them rivals. You slept where you could and did odd jobs for food. At times, when the hunger became unbearable, you resorted to theft. Still, you never lost your pride and never abandoned hope. Fate is not yet finished with you. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS 185 # Species Descriptions Ten species are presented in this section in alpha- betical order: Aasimar, Dragonborn, Dwarf, EIf,: Gnome, Goliath, Halfling, Human, Ore, and Tiefling. AASIMAR Aasimar (pronounced AH-sih-mar) are mortals who carry a spark of the Upper Planes within their souls. Whether descended from an angelic being or infused with celestial power, they can fan that spark to bring light, healing, and heavenly fury. Aasimar can arise among any population of mortals. They resemble their parents, but they live for up to 160 years and have features that hint at their celestial heritage, such as metallic freckles, luminous eyes, a halo, or the skin color of an angel (silver, opalescent green, or coppery red). These features start subtle and become obvious when the aasimar learns to reveal their full celestial nature. # Aasimar Traits Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 4-7 feet tall) or Small (about 2-4 feet tall), chosen when you select this species Speed: 30 feet As an Aasimar, you have these special traits. Celestial Resistance. You have Resistance to Ne- crotic damage and Radiant damage. Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. Healing Hands. As a Magic action, you touch a creature and roll a number of d4s equal to your Proficiency Bonus. The creature regains a number of Hit Points equal to the total rolled. Once you use this trait, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. a = 'CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS Light Bearer. You know the Light cantrip. '!ya- risma is your spellcasting ability for it. Celestial Revelation. When you reach character level 3, you can transform as a Bonus Action using one of the options below (choose the option each time you transform). The transformation lasts for 1 minute or until you end it (no action required), Once you transform, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. Once on each of your turns before the transfor- mation ends, you can deal extra damage to one tar- get when you deal damage to it with an attack ora spell. The extra damage equals your Proficiency Bo- nus, and the extra damage's type is either Necrotic for Necrotic Shroud or Radiant for Heavenly Wings and Inner Radiance. Here are the transformation options: Heavenly Wings. Two spectral wings sprout from your back temporarily. Until the transformation ends, you have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed. Inner Radiance. Searing light temporarily radiates from your eyes and mouth. For the duration, you shed Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 10 feet, and at the end of each of your turns, each creature within 10 feet of you takes Radiant damage equal to your Profi- ciency Bonus. Necrotic Shroud. Your eyes briefly become pools of darkness, and flightless wings sprout from your back temporarily. Creatures other than your allies within 10 feet of you must succeed on a Charisma saving throw (DC 8 plus your Charisma modifier and Proficiency Bonus) or have the Frightened condition until the end of your next turn. DRAGONBORN The ancestors of dragonborn hatched from the eggs of chromatic and metallic dragons. One story holds that these eggs were blessed by the dragon gods Bahamut and Tiamat, who wanted to populate the multiverse with people created in their image. Another story claims that dragons created the first dragonborn without the gods' blessings. Whatever their origin, dragonborn have made homes for themselves on the Material Plane. Dragonborn look like wingless, bipedal dragons--- scaly, bright-eyed, and thick-boned with horns on their heads---and their coloration and other features are reminiscent of their draconic ancestors. DRAGONBORN TRAITS Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 5-7 feet tall) Speed: 30 feet As a Dragonborn, you have these special traits. Draconic Ancestry. Your lineage stems from a dragon progenitor. Choose the kind of dragon from the Draconic Ancestors table. Your choice affects your Breath Weapon and Damage Resistance traits as well as your appearance. # Draconic Ancestors Dragon Damage Type Dragon Damage Type Black = Acid Gold Fire Blue Lightning Green Poison Brass Fire Red Fire Bronze \_Ligi:tning Silver Cold Copper Ac': White Cold Breath Weapon. When you take the Attack action on your turn, you can replace one of your attacks with an exhalation of magical energy in either a 15-foot Cone or a 30-foot Line that is 5 feet wide (choose the shape each time). Each creature in that area must make a Dexterity saving throw (DC 8 plus your Constitution modifier and Proficiency Bonus). On a failed save, a creature takes 1d10 damage of the type determined by your Draconic Ancestry trait. On a successful save, a creature takes half as much damage. This damage increases by 1d10 when you reach character levels 5 (2d10), 11 (3d10), and 17 (4d10). You can use this Breath Weapon a number of times equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and you re- gain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. Damage Resistance. You have Resistance to the damage type determined by your Draconic Ances- try trait. Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. Draconic Flight. When you reach character level 5, you can channel draconic magic to give yourself temporary flight. As a Bonus Action, you sprout spectral wings on your back that last for 10 minutes or until you retract the wings (no action required) or have the Incapacitated condition. During that time, you have a Fly Speed equal to your Speed. Your wings appear to be made of the same energy as your Breath Weapon. Once you use this trait, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS ee eee es eae DWARF Dwarves were raised from the earth in the elder days by a deity of the forge. Called by various names on different worlds---Moradin, Reorx, and others---that god gave dwarves an affinity for stone and metal and for living underground. The god also made them resilient like the mountains, with a life span of about 350 years. Squat and often bearded, the original dwarves carved cities and strongholds into mountainsides and under the earth. Their oldest legends tell of conflicts with the monsters of mountaintops and the Underdark, whether those monsters were tow- ering giants or subterranean horrors. Inspired by those tales, dwarves of any culture often sing of val- orous deeds---especially of the little overcoming the mighty. On some worlds in the multiverse, the first settle- ments of dwarves were built in hills or mountains, and the families who trace their ancestry to those settlements call themselves hill dwarves or moun- tain dwarves, respectively. The Greyhawk and Dragonlance settings have such communities. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS DwarF TRAITS Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 4-5 feet tall) Speed: 30 feet As a Dwarf, you have these special traits. Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 120 feet. Dwarven Resilience. You have Resistance to Poison damage. You also have Advantage on saving throws you make to avoid or end the Poisoned condition. Dwarven Toughness. Your Hit Point maximum increases by 1, and it increases by 1 again whenever you gain a level. Stonecunning. As a Bonus Action, you gain Trem- orsense with a range of 60 feet for 10 minutes. You must be on a stone surface or touching a stone surface to use this Tremorsense. The stone can be natural or worked. You can use this Bonus Action a number of times equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. ELF Created by the god Corellon, the first elves could change their forms at will. They lost this ability when Corellon cursed them for plotting with the deity Lolth, who tried and failed to usurp Corellon's dominion. When Lolth was cast into the Abyss, most elves renounced her and earned Corellon's for- giveness, but that which Corellon had taken from them was lost forever. No longer able to shape-shift at will, the elves retreated to the Feywild, where their sorrow was deepened by that plane's influence. Over time, cu- riosity led many of them to explore other planes of existence, including worlds in the Material Plane. Elves have pointed ears and lack facial and body hair. They live for around 750 years, and they don't sleep but instead enter a trance when they need to rest. In that state, they remain aware of their surroundings while immersing themselves in memories and meditations. An environment subtly transforms elves after they inhabit it for a millennium or more, and it grants them certain kinds of magic. Drow, high elves, and wood elves are examples of elves who have been transformed thus. DRow Drow typically dwell in the Underdark and have been shaped by it. Some drow individuals and soci- eties avoid the Underdark altogether yet carry its magic. In the Eberron setting, for example, drow dwell in rainforests and cyclopean ruins on the con- tinent of Xen'drik. HIGH ELvEs High elves have been infused with the magic of crossings between the Feywild and the Material Plane. On some worlds, high elves refer to them- selves by other names. For example, they call them- selves sun or moon elves in the Forgotten Realms setting, Silvanesti and Qualinesti in the Dragon- lance setting, and Aereni in the Eberron setting. Woop ELVES Wood elves carry the magic of primeval forests within themselves. They are known by many other names, including wild elves, green elves, and forest elves. Grugach are reclusive wood elves of the Grey- hawk setting, while the Kagonesti and the Tairnadal are wood elves of the Dragonlance and Eberron set- \| tings, respectively. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS 189 ------\~"---as- =" A SHIP DEPARTS FROM A CITY BUILT BY HIGH ELVES # Elf Traits Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 5-6 feet tall) Speed: 30 feet As an Elf, you have these special traits. Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. Elven Lineage. You are part of a lineage that grants you supernatural abilities. Choose a lineage from the Elven Lineages table. You gain the level 1 benefit of that lineage. When you reach character levels 3 and 5, you learn a higher-level spell, as shown on the table. You always have that spell prepared. You can cast it ELVEN LINEAGES Lineage ---\_Level 7 Drow The range of your Darkvision increases to 120 feet. You also know the Dancing Lights cantrip. You know the Prestidigitation cantrip. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace that cantrip with a different cantrip from the Wizard spell list. Wood Elf Your Speed increases to 35 feet. You also know the High Elf Druidcraft cantrip. CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS once without a spell slot, and you regain the ability to cast it in that way when you finish a Long Rest. You can also cast the spell using any spell slots you have of the appropriate level. Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell- casting ability for the spells you cast with this trait (choose the ability when you select the lineage). Fey Ancestry. You have Advantage on saving throws you make to avoid or end the Charmed condition. Keen Senses. You have proficiency in the Insight, Perception, or Survival skill. Trance. You don't need to sleep, and magic can't put you to sleep. You can finish a Long Rest in 4 hours if you spend those hours in a trancelike medi- tation, during which you retain consciousness. Level 5 Darkness Level 3 Faerie Fire Detect Magic Misty Step Longstrider GNOME Gnomes are magical folk created by gods of inven- tion, illusions, and life underground. The earliest gnomes were seldom seen by other folk due to the gnomes' secretive nature and their propensity for living in forests and burrows. What they lacked in size, they made up for in cleverness. They con- founded predators with traps and labyrinthine tunnels. They also learned magic from gods like Garl Glittergold, Baervan Wildwanderer, and Bar- avar Cloakshadow, who visited them in disguise. That magic eventually created the lineages of forest gnomes and rock gnomes. Gnomes are petite folk with big eyes and pointed ears, who live around 425 years. Many gnomes like the feeling of a roof over their head, even if that "roof" is nothing more than a hat. # Gnome Traits Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Small (about 3---4 feet tall) Speed: 30 feet Asa Gnome, you have these special traits. Darkvision. You have Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. Gnomish Cunning. You have Advantage on Intelli- gence, Wisdom, and Charisma saving throws. Gnomish Lineage. You are part of a lineage that grants you supernatural abilities. Choose one of the following: options; whichever one you choose, Intelligence, Wisdom, or Charisma is your spell- casting ability for the spells you cast with this trait (choose the ability when you select the lineage): Forest Gnome. You know the Minor Illusion cantrip. You also always have the Speak with Animals spell prepared. You can cast it without a spell slot a number of times equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You can also use any spell slots you have to cast the spell. Rock Gnome. You know the Mending and Presti- digitation cantrips. In addition, you can spend 10 minutes casting Prestidigitation to create a Tiny clockwork device (AC 5, 1 HP), such as a toy, fire starter, or music box. When you create the device, you determine its function by choosing one effect from Prestidigitation; the device produces that effect whenever you or another creature takes a Bonus Action to activate it with a touch. If the chosen effect has options within it, you choose one of those options for the device when you create it. For example, if you choose the spell's ignite-extinguish effect, you determine whether the device ignites or extinguishes fire; the device doesn't do both. You can have three such devices in existence at a time, and each falls apart 8 hours after its creation or when you dismantle it with a touch as a Utilize action. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS 191 --- \* Sst GOLIATH Towering over most folk, goliaths are distant de- scendants of giants. Each goliath bears the favors of the first giants---favors that manifest in various supernatural boons, including the ability to quickly grow and temporarily approach the height of goli- aths' gigantic kin. Goliaths have physical characteristics that are reminiscent of the giants in their family lines. For example, some goliaths look like stone giants, while others resemble fire giants. Whatever giants they count as kin, goliaths have forged their own path in the multiverse---unencumbered by the internecine conflicts that have ravaged giantkind for ages---and seek heights above those reached by their ancestors. # Goliath Traits Creature Type: Humanoid Size: Medium (about 7-8 feet tall) Speed: 35 feet As a Goliath, you have these special traits. Giant Ancestry. You are descended from Giants. Choose one of the following benefits---a supernat- ural boon from your ancestry; you can use the chosen benefit a number of times equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest: Cloud's Jaunt (Cloud Giant). As a Bonus Action, you magically teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccu- pied space you can see. la = \ \_ CHAPTER \| CHARACTER ORIGINS ------ Fire's Burn (Fire Giant). When you hit a target with an attack roll and deal damage to it, you can also deal 1d10 Fire damage to that target. Frost's Chill (Frost Giant). When you hit a target with an attack roll and deal damage to it, you can also deal 1d6 Cold damage to that target and reduce its Speed by 10 feet until the start of your next turn. Hill's Tumble (Hill Giant). When you hit a Large or smaller creature with an attack roll and deal damage to it, you can give that target the Prone condition. Stone's Endurance (Stone Giant). When you take damage, you can take a Reaction to roll 1d12. Add your Constitution modifier to the number rolled and reduce the damage by that total. Storm's Thunder (Storm Giant). When you take damage from a creature within 60 feet of you, you can take a Reaction to deal 1d8 Thunder dam- age to that creature. Large Form. Starting at character level 5, you can change your size to Large as a Bonus Action if you're in a big enough space. This transformation lasts for 10 minutes or until you end it (no action required). For that duration, you have Advantage on Strength checks, and your Speed increases by 10 feet. Once you use this trait, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest. Powerful Build. You have Advantage on any sav- ing throw you make to end the Grappled condition. You also count as one size larger when determining your carrying capacity.