# Level 4 Ranger Spells Spell Conjure Woodland Beings Dominate Beast Freedom of Movement Grasping Vine Locate Creature Stoneskin Summon Elemental School Special Transmutation R Abjuration M Transmutation --- Abjuration G Necromancy M Transmutation --- Conjuration c,M Transmutation R Transmutation R Evocation Cc School Special Conjuration Cc Enchantment c Abjuration \_ Conjuration Cc Divination C Transmutation C,M Conjuration C,M # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES LeveL 5 RANGER SPELLS Spell School Special Commune with Nature Divination R Conjure Volley Greater Restoration Steel Wind Strike Swift Quiver Tree Stride # Ranger Subclasses A Ranger subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Ranger levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Beast Master, Fey Wanderer, Gloom Stalker, and Hunter subclasses. # Beast Master Bond with a Primal Beast A Beast Master forms a mystical bond with a special animal, drawing on primal magic and a deep con- nection to the natural world. Conjuration = Abjuration M Conjuration M Transmutation C,M Conjuration € LEVEL 3: PRIMAL COMPANION You magically summon a primal beast, which draws strength from your bond with nature. Choose its stat block: Beast of the Land, Beast of the Sea, or Beast of the Sky. You also determine the kind of animal it is, choosing a kind appropriate for the stat block. Whatever beast you choose, it bears primal markings indicating its supernatural origin. The beast is Friendly to you and your allies and obeys your commands. It vanishes if you die. The Beast in Combat. In combat, the beast acts during your turn. It can move and use its Reaction on its own, but the only action it takes is the Dodge action unless you take a Bonus Action to command it to take an action in its stat block or some other action. You can also sacrifice one of your attacks when you take the Attack action to command the beast to take the Beast's Strike action. If you have the Incapacitated condition, the beast acts on its own and isn't limited to the Dodge action. Restoring or Replacing the Beast. If the beast has died within the last hour, you can take a Magic action to touch it and expend a spell slot. The beast returns to life after 1 minute with all its Hit Points restored, Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can sum- mon a different primal beast, which appears in an unoccupied space within 5 feet of you. You choose its stat block and appearance. If you already have a beast from this feature, the old one vanishes when the new one appears. LEVEL 7: EXCEPTIONAL TRAINING When you take a Bonus Action to command your Primal Companion beast to take an action, you can also command it to take the Dash, Disengage, Dodge, or Help action using its Bonus Action. In addition, whenever it hits with an attack roll and deals damage, it can deal your choice of Force damage or its normal damage type. LEVEL ll: BESTIAL FuRY When you command your Primal Companion beast to take the Beast's Strike action, the beast can use it twice. In addition, the first time each turn it hits a creature under the effect of your Hunter's Mark spell, the beast deals extra Force damage equal to the bonus damage of that spell. LEVEL 15: SHARE SPELLS When you cast a spell targeting yourself, you can also affect your Primal Companion beast with the spell if the beast is within 30 feet of you. BEAST OF THE LAND Medium Beast, Neutral AC 13 plus your Wisdom modifier | HP 5 plus five times your Ranger level (the beast has a number of Hit Dice (d8s\] equal to your Ranger level) Speed 40 ft., Climb 40 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 14 +2 +2 Dex 14 42 +2 Conl5 +2 +2 \| Int 8 -1 -1 Wis 14 +2 +2 CHATl +0 40 \| Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 Languages Understands the languages you know CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS | Primal Bond. Add your Proficiency Bonus to any ability check or saving throw the beast makes. ACTIONS | Beast's Strike. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your | spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 + 2 plus your | Wisdom modifier Bludgeoning, Piercing, or Slashing | damage (your choice when you summon the beast). | Ifthe beast moved at least 20 feet straight toward | the target before the hit, the target takes an extra 1d6 | damage of the same type, and the target has the Prone | condition if it is a Large or smaller creature. | | | | Beast Master Susciass Jo, # Fey Wanderer ---- | BEAST OF THE SKY \| | Small Beast, Neutral \| | AC 13 plus your Wisdom modifier | HP4 plus four times your Ranger level (the beast has a i number of Hit Dice \[d6s\] equal to your Ranger level) | Speed 10 ft., Fly 60 ft. i\] MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \|\| \| srr 6 -2 -2 Dex16 +3 +3 Coni3 +1 +1 \| int 8 -1 1 Wis 14 42 42 CHaTl +0 +0 | Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 | Languages Understands the languages you know CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) | Traits | Flyby. The beast doesn't provoke Opportunity Attacks | when it flies out of an enemy's reach. Primal Bond. Add your Proficiency Bonus to any ability check or saving throw the beast makes. | AcTIONS Beast's Strike. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d4 + 3 plus your Wisdom modifier Slashing damage. \| | BEAST OF THE SEA | Medium Beast, Neutral | aci3 plus your Wisdom modifier | HP 5 plus five times your Ranger level (the beast has a number of Hit Dice \[d8s\] equal to your Ranger level) | Speed 5 ft., Swim 60 ft. } MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 14 +2 +2 Dex 14 +2 +2 Con15 +2 +2 Int 8 -1 -1 Wis 14 42 42 Cnall +0 40 ) Senses Darkvision 90 ft., Passive Perception 12 \| Languages Understands the languages you know \| \| CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) \| | TRAITS \| | Amphibious. The beast can breathe air and water. |, Primal Bond. Add your Proficiency Bonus to any ability \| \| check or saving throw the beast makes. \| | ACTIONS | Beast's Strike. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your d \_ spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d6 + 2 plus your | Wisdom modifier Bludgeoning or Piercing damage ' (your choice when you summon the beast), and the tar- \| get has the Grappled condition (escape DC equals your | spell save DC). # Cuapdted Zi Chadacted Ctaccrse Wield Fey Mirth and Fury A fey mystique surrounds you, thanks to the boon of an archfey or a location in the Feywild that transformed you. However you gained fey magic, you are now a Fey Wanderer. Your joyful laughter brightens the hearts of the downtrodden, and your martial prowess strikes terror in your foes, for great is the mirth of the fey and dreadful is their fury, LEVEL 3: DREADFUL STRIKES You can augment your weapon strikes with mind-scarring magic drawn from the murky hol- lows of the Feywild. When you hit a creature with a weapon, you can deal an extra 1d4 Psychic damage to the target, which can take this extra damage only once per turn. The extra damage increases to 1d6 when you reach Ranger level 11. LEVEL 3: FEY WANDERER SPELLS When you reach a Ranger level specified in the Fey Wanderer Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. Fey WANDERER SPELLS Ranger Level Spell 3 Charm Person 5 Misty Step 9 Summon Fey 13 Dimension Door 7 Mislead You also possess a fey blessing. Choose it from the Feywild Gifts table or determine it randomly. FeYWILD GIFTS 1d6 Gift 1 Illusory butterflies flutter around you while you take a Short or Long Rest. 2 Flowers bloom from your hair each dawn. 3 You faintly smell of cinnamon, lavender, nut- meg, or another comforting herb or spice. 4 Your shadow dances while no one is looking directly at it. 5 Horns or antlers sprout from your head. 6 Your skin and hair change color each dawn. LEVEL 3: OTHERWORLDLY Gi.AMOUR Whenever you make a Charisma check, you gain a bonus to the check equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of +), You also gain proficiency in one of these skills of your choice: Deception, Performance, or Persuasion, LEvVE:. 7: BEGUILING TWIST The magic of the Feywild guards your mind. You have Advantage on saving throws to avoid or end the Charmed or Frightened condition. In addition, whenever you or a creature you can see within 120 feet of you succeeds on a saving throw to avoid or end the Charmed or Frightened condition, you can take a Reaction to force a differ- ent creature you can see within 120 feet of yourself to make a Wisdom save against your spell save DC. Ona failed save, the target is Charmed or Fright- ened (your choice) for 1 minute. The target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. LEVEL ll: FEY REINFORCEMENTS You can cast Summon Fey without a Material com- ponent. You can also cast it once without a spell slot, and you regain the ability to cast it in this way when you finish a Long Rest. Whenever you start casting the spell, you can modify it so that it doesn't require Concentration. If you do so, the spell's duration becomes 1 minute for that casting. LEVEL 15: MISTY WANDERER You can cast Misty Step without expending a spell slot. You can do so a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you re- gain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. In addition, whenever you cast Misty Step, you can bring along one willing creature you can see within 5 feet of yourself. That creature teleports to an un- occupied space of your choice within 5 feet of your destination space. GLOOM STALKER \_ Draw on Shadow Magic to Fight Your Foes Gloom Stalkers are at home in the darkest places, wielding magic drawn from the Shadowfell to com- bat enemies that lurk in darkness. LEVEL 3: DREAD AMBUSHER You have mastered the art of creating fearsome am- bushes, granting you the following benefits. Ambusher's Leap. At the start of your first turn of each combat, your Speed increases by 10 feet until the end of that turn. Dreadful Strike. When you attack a creature and hit it with a weapon, you can deal an extra 2d6 Psy- chic damage. You can use this benefit only once per turn, you can use it a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you re- gain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. Initiative Bonus. When you roll Initiative, you can add your Wisdom modifier to the roll. pet tEIOO Gioom STALKER LEVEL 3: GLOOM STALKER SPELLS When you reach a Ranger level specified in the Gloom Stalker Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. GLOOM STALKER SPELLS Ranger Level Spells 3 Disguise Self 5 Rope Trick 9 Fear 13 Greater Invisibility 7 Seeming LEVEL 3: UMBRAL SIGHT You gain Darkvision with a range of 60 feet. If you already have Darkvision when you gain this feature, its range increases by 60 feet. You are also adept at evading creatures that rely on Darkvision. While entirely in Darkness, you have the Invisible condition to any creature that relies on Darkvision to see you in that Darkness. LEVEL 7: IRON MIND You have honed your ability to resist mind-altering powers. You gain proficiency in Wisdom saving throws. If you already have this proficiency, you instead gain proficiency in Intelligence or Charisma saving throws (your choice). LEVEL 1\]: STALKER'S FLURRY The Psychic damage of your Dreadful Strike be- comes 2d8. In addition, when you use the Dreadful Strike effect of your Dread Ambusher feature, you can cause one of the following additional effects. Sudden Strike. You can make another attack with the same weapon against a different creature that is within 5 feet of the original target and that is within the weapon's range. Mass Fear. The target and each creature within 10 feet of it must make a Wisdom saving throw against your spell save DC. On a failed save, a creature has the Frightened condition until the start of your next turn, LeveL 15: SHADOWY DODGE When a creature makes an attack roll against you, you can take a Reaction to impose Disadvantage on that roll. Whether the attack hits or misses, you can then teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. fate yer Hunt +2 Protect Nature and People from Destruction You stalk prey in the wilds and elsewhere, using your abilities as a Hunter to protect nature and people everywhere from forces that would de- stroy them. LEVEL 3: HUNTER'S LORE You can call on the forces of nature to re- veal certain strengths and weaknesses of your prey. While a creature is marked by your Hunter's Mark, you know whether that creature has any Immunities, Resis- tances, or Vulnerabilities, and if the crea- ture has any, you know what they are. LEVEL 3: HUNTER'S PREY You gain one of the following feature op- tions of your choice. Whenever you finish a Short or Long Rest, you can replace the chosen option with the other one. Colossus Slayer. Your tenacity can wear down even the most resilient foes. When you hit a creature with a weapon, the weapon deals an extra 1d8 damage to the target if it's missing any of its Hit Points. You can deal this extra damage only once per turn. Horde Breaker. Once on each of your turns when you make an attack with a weapon, you can make another attack with the same weapon against a different creature that is within 5 feet of the original target, that is within the weapon's range, and that you haven't attacked this turn. LEVEL 7: DEFENSIVE TACTICS You gain one of the following feature options of your choice. Whenever you finish a Short or Long Rest, you can replace the chosen option with the other one. Escape the Horde. Opportunity Attacks have Disadvantage against you. Multiattack Defense. When a creature hits you with an attack roll, that creature has Disadvantage on all other attack rolls against you this turn. LEVEL 11: SUPERIOR HUNTER'S PREY Once per turn when you deal damage to a creature marked by your Hunter's Mark, you can also deal that spell's extra damage to a different creature that you can see within 30 feet of the first creature. LEVEL 15: SuPERIOR HUNTER'S DEFENSE When you take damage, you can take a Reaction to give yourself Resistance to that damage and any other damage of the same type until the end of the current tur: Hunter Susciass / ROGUE« ADelterous Expert in Stealth and Subterfiige BURORE HOctY Core ROGUE TRAITS Primary Ability Hit Point Die Dexterity D8 per Rogue level Saving Throw Proficiencies Skill Proficiencies Dexterity and Intelligence Choose 4: Acrobatics, Ath- letics, Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Investigation, Perception, Persuasion, Sleight of Hand, or Stealth Simple weapons and Mar- tial weapons that have the Finesse or Light property Thieves' Tools Weapon Proficiencies Tool Proficiencies Armor Training Light armor Starting Equipment Choose A or B: (A) Leather Armor, 2 Daggers, Short- sword, Shortbow, 20 Arrows, Quiver, Thieves' Tools, Bur- glar's Pack, and 8 GP; or (B) 100 GP OGUES RELY ON CUNNING, STEALTH, AND R their foes' vulnerabilities to get the upper hand in any situation. They have a knack for finding the solution to just about any problem. A few even learn magical tricks to supplement their other abilities. Many Rogues focus on stealth and deception, while others refine skills that help them in a dungeon environment, such as climbing, finding and disarming traps, and opening locks. In combat, Rogues prioritize subtle strikes over brute strength. They would rather make one precise strike than wear an opponent down with a barrage of blows. Some Rogues began their careers as criminals, while others used their cunning to fight crime. Whatever a Rogue's relation to the law, no common criminal or officer of the law can match the subtle brilliance of the greatest Rogues. # Becoming A Rogue... x As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Rogue Traits table. - Gain the Rogue's level 1 features, which are listed in the Rogue Features table. # As A Multiclass Character - Gain the following traits from the Core Rogue Traits table: Hit Point Die, proficiency in one skill of your choice from the Rogue's skill list, pro- ficiency with Thieves' Tools, and training with Light armor. - Gain the Rogue's level 1 features, which are listed in the Rogue Features table. # Rogue Class Features As a Rogue, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Rogue levels. These features are listed in the Rogue Features table. LEVEL \|: EXPERTISE You gain Expertise in two of your skill proficiencies of your choice. Sleight of Hand and Stealth are recommended if you have proficiency in them. At Rogue level 6, you gain Expertise in two more of your skill proficiencies of your choice. Levet \|: SNEAK ATTACK You know how to strike subtly and exploit a foe's distraction. Once per turn, you can deal an extra 1d6 damage to one creature you hit with an attack roll if you have Advantage on the roll and the attack uses a Finesse or a Ranged weapon. The extra dam- age's type is the same as the weapon's type. You don't need Advantage on the attack roll if at least one of your allies is within 5 feet of the target, the ally doesn't have the Incapacitated condition, and you don't have Disadvantage on the attack roll. The extra damage increases as you gain Rogue levels, as shown in the Sneak Attack column of the Rogue Features table. LEVEL \|: THIEVES' CANT You picked up various languages in the commu- nities where you plied your roguish talents. You know Thieves' Cant and one other language of your choice, which you choose from the language tables in chapter 2. LEVEL 1: WEAPON MASTERY Your training with weapons allows you to use the mastery properties of two kinds of weapons of your choice with which you have proficiency, such as Daggers and Shortbows. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change the kinds of weapons you chose. For example, you could switch to using the mastery properties of Scimitars and Shortswords. - AWADTED = \| AVADAART OCD AT arara ROGUE FEATURES Pronciency Sneak Attack Level Bonus \_ Class Features 1 +2 Expertise, Sneak Attack, Thieves' Cant, Weapon Mastery ee 2 +2 Cunning Action 3 +2 Rogue Subclass, Steady Aim 2d6 4 42 Ability Score Improvement 2d6 5 +3 Cunning Strike, Uncanny Dodge 3d6 6 +3 Expertise 3d6 7 43 Evasion, Reliable Talent 4d6 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 4d6 9 +4 Subclass feature 5d6 10 +4 Ability Score Improvement 5d6é u +4 Improved Cunning Strike 6d6 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 6d6 13 +5 Subclass feature 7d6 14 +5 Devious Strikes 7d6 15 +5 Slippery Mind 8d6 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 8d6 7 +6 Subclass feature 9d6 18 +6 Elusive 9d6 19 +6 Epic Boon 10d6 20 +6 Stroke of Luck 10d6 LEVEL 5: CUNNING STRIKE You've developed cunning ways to use your Sneak Attack. When you deal Sneak Attack damage, you! LEVEL 2: CUNNING ACTION ' \| i Your quick thinking and agility allow you to move yi and act quickly. On your turn, you can take one of t ii i the following actions as a Bonus Action: Dash, Dis- can add one of the following Cunning Strike effects. Me engage, or Hide. Each effect has a die cost, which is the number of i L R Sneak Attack damage dice you must forgo to add i lee Pi seared eussitons te aie You remove " e boos ellen and f; the effect occurs immediately after the attack's cane Trickster, Assassin, Soulknife, and Thief sub- damage is dealt. For soaranls acs add the Poison classes are detailed after this class's description. A effect, remove 1d6 from the Sneak Attack's damage subclass is a specialization that grants you features before rolling. at certain Rogue levels. For the rest of your career, If a Cunning Strike effect requires a saving throw, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of the DC equals 8 plus your Dexterity modifier and your Rogue level or lower. Proficiency Bonus. LEVEL 3: STEADY AIM Poison (Cost: 1d6). You add a toxin to your strike, AsaiBonus Action, you give yourself Advantage on forcing the target to make a Constitution saving your next attack roll on the current turn. You can throw. On a failed save, the target has the Poisoned use this feature only if you haven't moved during condition for 1 minute. At the end of each of its: this turn, and after you use it, your Speed is 0 until Suro eue poops target nepeatedthe:savenending thelehd @etheedttent:tirn the effect on itself on a success.: To use this effect, you must have a Poisoner's Kit LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT on your person. You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see Trip (Cost: 1d6). If the target is large or smaller, it must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or have chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which the Prone condition. you qualify. You gain this feature again at Rogue levels 8, 10, 12, and 16. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Withdraw (Cost: 1d6). Immediately after the at- tack, you move up to half your Speed without pro- voking Opportunity Attacks. LeveL 5: UNCANNY DODGE When an attacker that you can see hits you with an attack roll, you can take a Reaction to halve the at- tack's damage against you (round down). LEVEL 7: EVASION You can nimbly dodge out of the way of certain dangers. When you're subjected to an effect that allows you to make a Dexterity saving throw to take only half damage, you instead take no damage if you succeed on the saving throw and only half dam- age if you fail. You can't use this feature if you have the Incapacitated condition. LEVEL 7: RELIABLE TALENT Whenever you make an ability check that uses one of your skill or tool proficiencies, you can treat a d20 roll of 9 or lower as a 10. LEVEL 11: IMPROVED CUNNING STRIKE You can use up to two Cunning Strike effects when you deal Sneak Attack damage, paying the die cost for each effect. LEVEL 14: DEvious STRIKES You've practiced new ways to use your Sneak At- tack deviously. The following effects are now among your Cunning Strike options. Daze (Cost: 2d6). The target must succeed ona Constitution saving throw, or on its next turn, it can do only one of the following: move or take an action or a Bonus Action. Knock Out (Cost: 6d6). The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw, or it has the Uncon- scious condition for 1 minute or until it takes any damage. The Unconscious target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Obscure (Cost: 3d6). The target must succeed ona Dexterity saving throw, or it has the Blinded condi- tion until the end of its next turn. LevEL 15: SLipPERY MIND Your cunning mind is exceptionally difficult to con- trol. You gain proficiency in Wisdom and Charisma saving throws. LEVEL 18: ELUSIVE You're so evasive that attackers rarely gain the upper hand against you. No attack roll can have Advantage against you unless you have the Incapac- itated condition. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of the Night Spirit is recommended. LEVEL 20: STROKE OF LucK You have a marvelous knack for succeeding when you need to. If you fail a D20 Test, you can turn the roll into a 20. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Short or Long Rest. ROGUE SUBCLASSES A Rogue subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Rogue levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Arcane Trickster, Assassin, Soulknife, and Thief subclasses. # Arcane Trickster Enhance Stealth with Arcane Spells Some Rogues enhance their fine-honed skills of stealth and agility with spells, learning magical tricks to aid them in their trade. Some Arcane Tricksters use their talents as pickpockets and bur- glars, while others are pranksters. LEVEL 3: SPELLCASTING You have learned to cast spells. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules as an Arcane Trickster. Cantrips. You know three cantrips: Mage Hand and two other cantrips of your choice from the Wizard spell list (see that class's sec- tion for its list). Mind Sliver and Minor Illusion are recommended. jy) Whenever you gain a Rogue level, you can replace? one of your cantrips, except Mage Hand, with an- other Wizard cantrip of your choice. When you reach Rogue level 10, you learn another Wizard cantrip of your choice. Spell Slots. The Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended spell slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose three level 1 Wizard spells. Charm Person, Disguise Self, and Fog Cloud are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Rogue levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional Wizard spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the Arcane Trickster Spellcasting table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 7 Rogue, your list of prepared spells can include five Wizard spells of level 1 or 2 in any combination. Arcane Trickster Susctass ARCANE TRICKSTER SPELLCASTING Rogue Prepared ---Spell Slots per Spell Level--- Level Spells 1 2 3 4 3 3 2 = *---* 4 4 3 = = --- 5 4 3 = = --- 6 4 3 = == ane 7 5 4 2 = = 8 6 4 2 *---* --- 9 6 4 2 *---* --- 10 7 4 3 = --- ah 8 4 3 --- ---*--- 12 8 4 3 eee B 9 4 3 2 = 14 10 4 3 2* aby 10 4 3 2 \_--- 16 uv 4 3 3 = 7 n 4 3 3 --- 18 n 4 3 3 = 19 12 4 3 3 1 20 13 4 3 3 1 Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Rogue level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Wizard spell for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Intelligence is your spellcast- ing ability for your Wizard spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Wizard spells. LEVEL 3: MAGE HAND LEGERDEMAIN When you cast Mage Hand, you can cast it as a Bonus Action, and you can make the spectral hand Invisible. You can control the hand as a Bonus Action, and through it, you can make Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) checks. LEVEL 9: MacicaL AMBUSH If you have the Invisible condition when you cast a spell on a creature, it has Disadvantage on any saving throw it makes against the spell on the same turn. LEVEL 13: VERSATILE TRICKSTER You gain the ability to distract targets with your Mage Hand. When you use the Trip option of your Cunning Strike on a creature, you can also use that option on another creature within 5 feet of the spectral hand. LEVEL 17: SPELL THIEF You gain the ability to magically steal the knowledge of how to cast a spell from another spellcaster. Immediately after a creature casts a spell that targets you or includes you in its area of effect, you can take a Reaction to force the creature to make an Intelligence saving throw. The DC equals your spell save DC. On a failed save, you negate the spell's ef- fect against you, and you steal the knowledge of the spell if it is at least level 1 and of a level you can cast (it doesn't need to be a Wizard spell). For the next 8 hours, you have the spell prepared. The creature can't cast it until the 8 hours have passed. Once you steal a spell with this feature, you can't use this feature again until you finish a Long Rest. a Susciass ASSASSIN Practice the Grim Art of Death An Assassin's training focuses on using stealth, poison, and disguise to eliminate foes with deadly efficiency. While some Rogues who follow this path are hired killers, spies, or bounty hunters, the capa- bilities of this subclass are equally useful for adven- turers facing a variety of monstrous enemies. LEVEL 3: ASSASSINATE You're adept at ambushing a target, granting you the following benefits. Initiative. You have Advantage on Initiative rolls. Surprising Strikes. During the first round of each combat, you have Advantage on attack rolls against any creature that hasn't taken a turn. If your Sneak Attack hits any target during that round, the target takes extra damage of the weapon's type equal to your Rogue level. LEVEL 3: ASSASSIN'S TOOLS You gain a Disguise Kit and a Poisoner's Kit, and you have proficiency with them. LEVEL 9: INFILTRATION EXPERTISE You are expert at the following techniques that aid your infiltrations. Masterful Mimicry. You can unerringly mimic an- other person's speech, handwriting, or both if you have spent at least 1 hour studying them. Roving Aim. Your Speed isn't reduced to O by using Steady Aim. LEVEL 13: ENVENOM WEAPONS When you use the Poison option of your Cunning Strike, the target also takes 2d6 Poison damage whenever it fails the saving throw. This damage ignores Resistance to Poison damage. LeveL 17: DEATH STRIKE When you hit with your Sneak Attack on the first round of a combat, the target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexter- ity modifier and Proficiency Bonus), or the attack's damage is doubled against the target. SOUL# NIFE 2 Strike Foes with Psionic Blades A Soulknife strikes with the mind, cutting through barriers both physical and psychic. These Rogues discover psionic power within themselves and channel it to do their roguish work. As a Soulknife, your psionic abilities might have haunted you since childhood, revealing their full potential only as you experienced the stress of adventure. Or you might have sought out an order of psychic adepts and spent years learning how to manifest your power. LEVEL 3: PSIONIC POWER You harbor a wellspring of psionic energy within yourself. It is represented by your Psionic Energy Dice, which fuel certain powers you have from this subclass. The Soulknife Energy Dice table shows the number of these dice you have when you reach cer- tain Rogue levels, and the table shows the die size. # Soulknife Energy Dice Rogue Level Die Size Number 3 Dé 4 5 D8 6 9 D8 8 V D10 8 13 DIO 10 7 D12 12 Any features in this subclass that use a Psionic En- ergy Die use only the dice from this subclass. Some of your powers expend a Psionic Energy Die, as specified in a power's description, and you can't use a power if it requires you to use a die when your Psionic Energy Dice are all expended. You regain one of your expended Psionic Energy Dice when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all of them when you finish a Long Rest. Psi-Bolstered Knack. If you fail an ability check us- ing a skill or tool with which you have proficiency, you can roll one Psionic Energy Die and add the number rolled to the check, potentially turning failure into success. The die is expended only if the roll then succeeds. Psychic Whispers. You can establish telepathic communication between yourself and others. As a Magic action, choose one or more creatures you can see, up to a number of creatures equal to your Proficiency Bonus, and then roll one Psionic Energy Die. For a number of hours equal to the number rolled, the chosen creatures can speak telepathically with you, and you can speak telepathically with them. To send or receive a message (no action re- quired), you and the other creature must be within 1 SouLknire Susciass mile of each other. A creature can end the telepathic connection at any time (no action required). The first time you use this power after each Long Rest, you don't expend the Psionic Energy Die. All other times you use the power, you expend the die. LEVEL 3: PSYCHIC BLADES You can manifest shimmering blades of psychic en- ergy. Whenever you take the Attack action or make an Opportunity Attack, you can manifest a Psychic Blade in your free hand and make the attack with that blade. The magic blade has the following traits: Weapon Category: Simple Melee Damage on a Hit: 1d6 Psychic plus the ability modifier used for the attack roll Properties: Finesse, Thrown (range 60/120 feet) Mastery: Vex (you can use this property, and it doesn't count against the number of properties you can use with Weapon Mastery) The blade vanishes immediately after it hits or misses its target, and it leaves no mark if it deals damage. After you attack with the blade on your turn, you can make a melee or ranged attack with a second psychic blade as a Bonus Action on the same turn if your other hand is free to create it. The damage die of this bonus attack is 1d4 instead of 1d6. LEVEL 9: SouUL BLADES You can now use the following powers with your Psychic Blades. Homing Strikes. If you make an attack roll with your Psychic Blade and miss the target, you can roll one Psionic Energy Die and add the number rolled to the attack roll. If this causes the attack to hit, the die is expended. \<\< \<= ---\< --- Psychic Teleportation. As a Bonus Action, you manifest a Psychic Blade, expend one Psionic En- ergy Die and roll it, and throw the blade at an un- occupied space you can see up to a number of feet away equal to 10 times the number rolled. You then teleport to that space, and the blade vanishes, LeEvEL 13: PsycHIc VEIL You can weave a veil of psychic static to mask your- self. As a Magic action, you gain the Invisible con- dition for 1 hour or until you dismiss this effect (no action required). This invisibility ends early imme- diately after you deal damage to a creature or you force a creature to make a saving throw. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend a Psionic Energy Die (no action required) to restore your use of it. LEVEL 17: REND MIND You can sweep your Psychic Blades through a creature's mind. When you use your Psychic Blades to deal Sneak Attack damage to a creature, you can force that target to make a Wisdom saving throw (DC 8 plus your Dexterity modifier and Proficiency Bonus). If the save fails, the target has the Stunned condition for 1 minute. The Stunned target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest unless you expend three Psionic Energy Dice (no action required) to restore your use of it. THIEF Hunt for Treasure as a Classic Adventurer \$\$ A mix of burglar, treasure hunter, and explorer, you are the epitome of an adventurer. In addition to im- proving your agility and stealth, you gain abilities useful for delving into ruins and getting maximum benefit from the magic items you find there. LevEL 3: Fast HANDS As a Bonus Action, you can do one of the following. Sleight of Hand. Make a Dexterity (Sleight of Hand) check to pick a lock or disarm a trap with Thieves' Tools or to pick a pocket. Use an Object. Take the Utilize action, or take the Magic action to use a magic item that requires that action. LEVEL 3: SECOND-STORY WoRK You've trained to get into especially hard-to-reach places, granting you these benefits. Climber. You gain a Climb Speed equal to your Speed. Jumper. You can determine your jump distance using your Dexterity rather than your Strength. LEVEL 9: SUPREME SNEAK You gain the following Cunning Strike option. Stealth Attack (Cost: 1d6). If you have the Hide action's Invisible condition, this attack doesn't end that condition on you if you end the turn behind Three-Quarters Cover or Total Cover. LEVEL 13: Use Macic DEVICE You've learned how to maximize use of magic items, granting you the following benefits. Attunement. You can attune to up to four magic items at once. Charges. Whenever you use a magic item property that expends charges, roll 1d6. On a roll of 6, you use the property without expending the charges. Scrolls. You can use any Spell Scroll, using Intelli- gence as your spellcasting ability for the spell. If the spell is a cantrip or a level 1 spell, you can cast it re- liably. If the scroll contains a higher-level spell, you must first succeed on an Intelligence (Arcana) check (DC 10 plus the spell's level). On a successful check, you cast the spell from the scroll. On a failed check, the scroll disintegrates. LEVEL 17: THIEF'S REFLEXES You are adept at laying ambushes and quickly es- caping danger. You can take two turns during the first round of any combat. You take your first turn at your normal Initiative and your second turn at your Initiative minus 10. ee a a alas 4 we a A Dazzling Mage Filled with Innate Magi J | | | Core SORCERER TRAITS Primary Ability Hit Point Die Saving Throw Proficiencies Skill Proficiencies Charisma D6 per Sorcerer level Constitution and Charisma Choose 2: Arcana, Deception, Insight, Intimidation, Persua- sion, or Religion Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons None Choose A or B: (A) Spear, 2 Daggers, Arcane Focus (crystal), Dungeoneer's Pack, \| and 28 GP; or (B) 50 GP Armor Training Starting Equipment elf" a ORCERERS WIELD INNATE MAGIC THAT IS `\Q`{=tex}) stamped into their being. Some Sorcerers can't `\Y `{=tex}name the origin of their power, while others trace it to strange events in their personal or family history. The blessing of a dragon or a dryad ata baby's birth or the strike of lightning from a clear sky might spark a Sorcerer's gift. So too might the gift of a deity, exposure to the strange magic of another plane of existence, or a glimpse into the inner workings of reality. Whatever the origin, the result is an indelible mark on the Sorcerer, a churning magic that can be passed down through generations. Sorcerers don't learn magic; the raw, roiling power of magic is part of them. The essential art of a Sorcerer is learning to harness and channel that innate magic, allowing the Sorcerer to discover new and staggering ways to unleash their power. As Sor- cerers master their innate magic, they grow more attuned to its origin, developing distinct powers that reflect its source. Sorcerers are rare. Some family lines produce exactly one Sorcerer in every generation, but most of the time, the talents of sorcery appear as a fluke. People who have this magical power soon discover that it doesn't like to stay quiet. A Sorcerer's magic wants to be wielded. # Becoming A Sorcerer... As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER + Gain all the traits in the Core Sorcerer Traits table. - Gain the Sorcerer's level 1 features, which are listed in the Sorcerer Features table. | As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the Hit Point Die from the Core Sorcerer Traits table. - Gain the Sorcerer's level 1 features, which are listed in the Sorcerer Features table. See the mul- ticlassing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. # Sorcerer Class Features Asa Sorcerer, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Sorcerer levels. These features are listed in the Sorcerer Features table. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING Drawing from your innate magic, you can cast spells. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Sorcerer spells, which appear in the Sor- cerer spell list later in the class's description. Cantrips. You know four Sorcerer cantrips of your choice. Light, Prestidigitation, Shocking Grasp, and Sorcerous Burst are recommended. Whenever you gain a Sorcerer level, you can replace one of your cantrips from this feature with another Sor- cerer cantrip of your choice. When you reach Sorcerer levels 4 and 10, you learn another Sorcerer cantrip of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Sorcerer Fea- tures table. Spell Slots. The Sorcerer Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 Sor- cerer spells. Burning Hands and Detect Magic are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Sorcerer levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Sorcerer Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional is bPes. 4.) ay. an DAme nN Ae RReR 140