# Ranged Attacks MELEE ATTACKS \_ A melee attack allows you to attack a target within your reach. A melee attack typically uses a hand- held weapon or an Unarmed Strike. Many monsters make melee attacks with claws, teeth, or other body parts. A few spells also involve melee attacks. REACH Acreature has a 5-foot reach and can thus attack targets within 5 feet when making a melee attack. Certain creatures have melee attacks with a reach greater than 5 feet, as noted in their descriptions. OPpPporTUNITY ATTACKS Combatants watch for enemies to drop their guard. If you move heedlessly past your foes, you put your- self in danger by provoking an Opportunity Attack. Avoiding Opportunity Attacks. You can avoid pro- voking an Opportunity Attack by taking the Disen- gage action. You also don't provoke an Opportunity Attack when you Teleport or when you are moved without using your movement, action, Bonus Ac- tion, or Reaction. For example, you don't provoke an Opportunity Attack if an explosion hurls you out of a foe's reach or if you fall past an enemy. Making an Opportunity Attack. You can make an Opportunity Attack when a creature that you can see leaves your reach. To make the attack, take a Reaction to make one melee attack with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike against that creature. The attack occurs right before it leaves your reach. # Mounted Combat When you make a ranged attack, you fire a bow, hurl an axe, or otherwise send projectiles to strike a foe at a distance. Many spells also involve making a ranged attack. RANGE You can make ranged attacks only against targets within a specified range. If a ranged attack, such as one made with a spell, has a single range, you can't attack a target beyond this range. Some ranged attacks, such as those made with a Longbow, have two ranges. The smaller number is the normal range, and the larger number is the long range. Your attack roll has Disadvantage when your target is beyond normal range, and you can't attack a target beyond long range. RANGED ATTACKS IN CLOSE COMBAT Aiming a ranged attack is more difficult when a foe is next to you. When you make a ranged attack roll with a weapon, a spell, or some other means, you have Disadvantage on the roll if you are within 5 feet of an enemy who can see you and doesn't have the Incapacitated condition (see the rules glossary). # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME A willing creature that is at least one size larger than a rider and that has an appropriate anatomy can serve as a mount, using the following rules. # Mounting And Dismounting During your move, you can mount a creature that is within 5 feet of you or dismount. Doing so costs an amount of movement equal to half your Speed (round down). For example, if your Speed is 30 feet, you spend 15 feet of movement to mount a horse. CONTROLLING A MouNT You can control a mount only if it has been trained to accept a rider. Domesticated horses, mules, and similar creatures have such training. The Initiative of a controlled mount changes to match yours when you mount it. It moves on your turn as you direct it, and it has only three action op- tions during that turn: Dash, Disengage, and Dodge. A controlled mount can move and act even on the turn that you mount it. In contrast, an independent mount---one that lets you ride but ignores your control---retains its place in the Initiative order and moves and acts as it likes. ASTRIDE A GIANT SEAHORSE, A PALADIN ADVENTURES, UNDERWATER FALLING OFF If an effect is about to move your mount against its will while you're on it, you must succeed on a DC 10 Dexterity saving throw or fall off, landing with the Prone condition (see the rules glossary) in an unoc- cupied space within 5 feet of the mount. While mounted, you must make the same save if you're knocked Prone or the mount is. # Underwater Combat A fight underwater follows these rules. IMPEDED WEAPONS When making a melee attack roll with a weapon underwater, a creature that lacks a Swim Speed has Disadvantage on the attack roll unless the weapon deals Piercing damage. A ranged attack roll with a weapon underwater automatically misses a target beyond the weapon's normal range, and the attack roll has Disadvantage against a target within normal range. # Fire Resistance Anything underwater has Resistance to Fire dam- age (explained in "Damage and Healing"). # Damage And Healing Injury and death are frequent threats in D&D, as detailed in the following rules. HiT PoInts Hit Points represent durability and the will to live. Creatures with more Hit Points are more difficult to kill. Your Hit Point maximum is the number of Hit Points you have when uninjured. Your current Hit Points can be any number from that maximum down to 0, which is the lowest Hit Points can go. Whenever you take damage, subtract it from your Hit Points. Hit Point loss has no effect on your capa- bilities until you reach O Hit Points. If you have half your Hit Points or fewer, you're Bloodied, which has no game effect on its own but which might trigger other game effects. # Damage Rolls Each weapon, spell, and damaging monster ability specifies the damage it deals. You roll the damage dice, add any modifiers, and deal the damage to your target. If there's a penalty to the damage, it's possible to deal 0 damage but not negative damage. When attacking with a weapon, you add your ability modifier---the same modifier used for the at- tack roll---to the damage roll. A spell tells you which dice to roll for damage and whether to add any modifiers. Unless a rule says otherwise, you don't add your ability modifier to a fixed damage amount that doesn't use a roll, such as the damage of a Blowgun. See chapter 6 for weapons' damage dice and chapter 7 for spells' damage dice. Critica Hits When you score a Critical Hit, you deal extra dam- age. Roll the attack's damage dice twice, add them together, and add any relevant modifiers as nor- mal. For example, if you score a Critical Hit with a ---\_ Sl RESTING Adventurers can't spend every hour adventuring. They need rest. Any creature can take hour-long Short Rests in the midst of a day and an 8-hour Long Rest to end it. Regaining Hit Points is one of the main benefits of a rest. The rules glossary # provides the rules for Short and Long Rests. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME 2" 28 i Dagger, roll 2d4 for the damage rather than 1d4, and add your relevant ability modifier. If the attack in- volves other damage dice, such as from the Rogue's Sneak Attack feature, you also roll those dice twice. SAVING THROWS AND DAMAGE Damage dealt via saving throws uses these rules. DAMAGE AGAINST MULTIPLE TARGETS When you create a damaging effect that forces two or more targets to make saving throws against it at the same time, roll the damage once for all the tar- gets. For example, when a Wizard casts Fireball, the spell's damage is rolled once for all creatures caught in the blast. HALF DAMAGE Many saving throw effects deal half damage (round down) to a target when the target succeeds on the saving throw. The halved damage is equal to half the damage that would be dealt on a failed save. # Damage Types Each instance of damage has a type, like Fire or Slashing. Damage types are listed in the rules glos- sary and have no rules of their own, but other rules, such as Resistance, rely on damage types. # Resistance And Vulnerability Some creatures and objects have Resistance or Vulnerability to certain damage types. If you have Resistance to a damage type, damage of that type is halved against you (round down). If you have Vulnerability to a damage type, damage of that type is doubled against you. For example, if you have Resistance to Cold damage, such damage is halved against you, and if you have Vulnerability to Fire damage, such damage is doubled against you. No Stack1nc Multiple instances of Resistance or Vulnerability that affect the same damage type count as only one instance. For example, if you have Resistance to Ne- crotic damage as well as Resistance to all damage, Necrotic damage is reduced by half against you. ORDER OF APPLICATION Modifiers to damage are applied in the following order: adjustments such as bonuses, penalties, or multipliers are applied first; Resistance is applied second; and Vulnerability is applied third. For example, a creature has Resistance to all damage and Vulnerability to Fire damage, and it's within a magical aura that reduces all damage by 5. If it takes 28 Fire damage, the damage is first reduced by 5 (to 23), then halved for the creature's Resistance (and rounded down to 11), then doubled for its Vulnerability (to 22). CHAPTER \| \| PLAYING THE GAME IMMUNITY a Some creatures and objects have Immunity to cer- tain damage types and conditions. Immunity toa damage type means you don't take damage of that type, and Immunity toa condition means you aren't affected by it. HEALING \_ ee Hit Points can be restored by magic, such as the Cure Wounds spell or a Potion of Healing, or by a Short or Long Rest (see the rules glossary). When you receive healing, add the restored Hit Points to your current Hit Points. Your Hit Points can't exceed your Hit Point maximum, so any Hit Points regained in excess of the maximum are lost. For example, if you receive 8 Hit Points of healing and have 14 Hit Points and a Hit Point maximum of 20, you regain 6 Hit Points, not 8. DropPinc TO 0 HiT POINTS When a creature drops to O Hit Points, it either dies outright or falls unconscious, as explained below. INSTANT DEATH Here are the main ways a creature can die instantly. Monster Death. A monster dies the instant it drops to O Hit Points, although a Dungeon Master can ig- nore this rule for an individual monster and treat it like a character. Hit Point Maximum of 0. A creature dies if its Hit Point maximum reaches 0. Certain effects drain life energy, reducing a creature's Hit Point maximum. Massive Damage. When damage reduces a charac- ter to O Hit Points and damage remains, the char- acter dies if the remainder equals or exceeds their Hit Point maximum. For example, if your character has a Hit Point maximum of 12, currently has 6 Hit Points, and takes 18 damage, the character drops to 0 Hit Points, but 12 damage remains. The character then dies, since 12 equals their Hit Point maximum. # Character Demise If your character dies, others might find a magical way to revive your character, such as with the Raise Dead spell. Or talk with the DM about making a new character to join the group. The rules glossary has more information on being dead. # Falling Unconscious If you reach 0 Hit Points and don't die instantly, you have the Unconscious condition (see the rules glos- sary) until you regain any Hit Points, and you now face making Death Saving Throws (see below). # Death Saving Throws Whenever you start your turn with 0 Hit Points, you must make a Death Saving Throw to determine whether you creep closer to death or hang on to life. KNOCKING Out A CREATURE When you would reduce a creature to 0 Hit Points with a melee attack, you can instead reduce the creature to 1 Hit Point and give it the Uncon- scious condition, It then starts a Short Rest, at the end of which that condition ends on it. The condition ends early if the creature regains any Hit Points or if someone takes an action to ad- minister first aid to it, making a successful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check.: \~\_ Unlike other saving throws, this one isn't tied to an ability score. You're in the hands of fate now. Three Successes/Failures. Roll 1d20. If the roll is 10 or higher, you succeed. Otherwise, you fail. A suc- cess or failure has no effect by itself. On your third success, you become Stable (see "Stabilizing a Char- acter" below). On your third failure, you die. The successes and failures don't need to be con- secutive; keep track of both until you collect three of a kind. The number of both is reset to zero when you regain any Hit Points or become Stable. Rolling a 1 or 20. When you roll a1 on the d20 for a Death Saving Throw, you suffer two failures. If you roll a 20 on the d20, you regain 1 Hit Point. Damage at O Hit Points. If you take any damage while you have O Hit Points, you suffer a Death Sav- ing Throw failure. If the damage is from a Critical Hit, you suffer two failures instead. If the damage equals or exceeds your Hit Point maximum, you die. # Stabilizing A Character You can take the Help action to try to stabilize a creature with O Hit Points, which requires a suc- cessful DC 10 Wisdom (Medicine) check. A Stable creature doesn't make Death Saving Throws even though it has O Hit Points, but it still has the Unconscious condition. If the creature takes damage, it stops being Stable and starts making Death Saving Throws again. A Stable creature that isn't healed regains 1 Hit Point after 1d4 hours. # Temporary Hit Points Some spells and other effects confer Temporary Hit Points, which are a buffer against losing actual Hit Points, as explained below. Lose TEMPORARY HiT POINTS FIRST If you have Temporary Hit Points and take damage, those points are lost first, and any leftover damage carries over to your Hit Points. For example, if you have 5 Temporary Hit Points and take 7 damage, you lose those points and then lose 2 Hit Points. DURATION Temporary Hit Points last until they're depleted or you finish a Long Rest (see the rules glossary). Tuey Don't STACK Temporary Hit Points can't be added together. If you have Temporary Hit Points and receive more of them, you decide whether to keep the ones you have or to gain the new ones. For example, if a spell grants you 12 Temporary Hit Points when you al- ready have 10, you can have 12 or 10, not 22. THEY'RE NoT Hit POInts oR HEALING Temporary Hit Points can't be added to your Hit Points, healing can't restore them, and receiving Temporary Hit Points doesn't count as healing. Because Temporary Hit Points aren't Hit Points, a creature can be at full Hit Points and receive Tem- porary Hit Points. If you have O Hit Points, receiving Temporary Hit Points doesn't restore you to consciousness. Only true healing can save you. CONDITIONS Many effects impose a condition, a temporary state that alters the recipient's capabilities. The following conditions are defined in the rules glossary: Blinded Grappled Poisoned Charmed Incapacitated Prone Deafened Invisible Restrained Exhaustion Paralyzed Stunned Frightened Petrified Unconscious The definition of a condition specifies what happens to its recipient while affected by it, and some condi- tions apply other conditions. DURATION A condition lasts either for a duration specified by the effect that imposed the condition or until the condition is countered (the Prone condition is coun- tered by standing up, for example). No STACKING If multiple effects impose the same condition on you, each instance of the condition has its own du- ration, but the condition's effects don't get worse. Either you have a condition or you don't. The Ex- haustion condition is an exception; its effects get worse if you have the condition and receive it again. # Combat And Damage Example In this scene, threats force a group of adventur- ers into battle. This example demonstrates the turn-based flow of combat that gives each player achance to detail what they do during the high- stakes moments of a fight. Below Castle Ravenloft, the characters enter combat! Jared (as DM): Yellow lichen covers the ceiling in this passage, which has alcoves along both sides. Russell (as Shreve): \| peer into the nearest alcoves. \| Jared: They each contain human skeletal remains. \| The silence is broken suddenly by the rattle of cs) bones as the skeletons lurch to their feet all \| around you and prepare to attack! Russell: Ack! How many skeletons? © Jared: Ten in all, and they're hostile. Roll Initiative! Russell: Ten skeletons? Yikes! \| got a 16. Maeve (as Mirabella): \| got 8. Phillip (as Gareth): An incredible 2 for Gareth. Amy (as Auro): \| got a 19! \| Jared: The Rogue is quick to react---but not as quick @ as the skeletons! They got a 20. The first four \| attack the person in the lead: Shreeve. Russell: Oh, boy. \| Jared: Their attack roll totals are 8, 16, 18, and 20. \| Russell: The 8 and 16 miss my AC, but the others hit. D jared: Two of them stick you with their broken \| blades, dealing a total of 9 Piercing damage. Russell: Is that the best you can do? Phillip: Never say that to the DM. Jared: Heh. Now two of them attack Auro. The first roll is a natural 1: a miss. The second roll is 16. Amy: That hits. Jared: You take 4 Piercing damage, and one of them attacks Mirabella with a roll of 14. @ Maeve: Hits. No, wait! \| cast Shield, so that misses. Jared: The skeleton's blade bounces off your shield of magical force. Then two of them attack Gareth. One misses with a 5, but the other one lands a solid blow with a 21, dealing 7 piercing damage. Phillip: That got my attention! Jared: That's nine attacks. There's one more skeleton at the end of the hall. It moves up and waits for an opening. Now it's Auro's turn. Amy: \| attack one close to me. Does a 24 hit? Jared: A solid hit! Amy: And it's next to one of my allies, right? Jared: Yes. @® Amy: So with my Sneak Attack, that's 22 damage! Jared: Your blade slides into an empty eye socket, and the skeleton clatters to the ground, now inani- mate and harmless. Amy: Then \| use Cunning Action to Disengage as a Bonus Action and move 20 feet out of the melee. Jared: Very good. Shreeve? Russell: \| drop my sword and pull out my warham- mer. Time to break some bones! My first attack is "allto hit for 7 Bludgeoning damage. CHAPTER\] \| PLAYING THE GAME \ ey Starting Combat. While describing the skel- etons animating, the DM gets ready to start combat by mentally figuring out where every- one is, referring to the map of the area and i the party's established marching order. Q \[i Rolling Initiative. The next step in combat is for everyone involved to roll Initiative. go Y Taking Turns. Now each participant in the battle takes a turn in Initiative order. The skeletons go first because they got the high- est Initiative: 20. a % "& \| Attack Rolls. When a creature attacks, whether swinging a sword or firing an arrow from a bow, its player makes an attack roll. If the total is equal to or higher than the tar- get's Armor Class (AC), the attack hits. J aI XN Se r= Y as Spells and Reactions. Mirabella casts the Shield spell. It's a special property of this spell that it can be cast even when it's not the caster's turn, using her Reaction (see "Actions" earlier in this chapter). =e ® \<== == Ja & é Special Abilities. Auro's Sneak Attack lets him deal extra damage to the skeletons, and his Cunning Action lets him Disengage as a Bonus Action. These are examples of class features (described in chapter 3) that let characters bend the rules. Q 4 --- ------== ie Vulnerability. An attack that deals Bludgeon- ing damage is deadly to skeletons. Shreeve knows this from past experience, which is why she drops her sword and switches to a Bludgeoning weapon. She rolls only 7 dam- age, but the DM knows the skeleton actually takes 14 damage. Jared: It tries to block your swing, but the force of your blow destroys the skeleton! Russell: \| swing at the next skeleton with 11 to hit. Jared: The skeleton dodges out of the way. Russell: Rats. That's my turn. Jared: Mirabella? @ Maeve: How many can \| get in a 15-foot Cube? Jared: Three if you don't want to get Shreeve too. Maeve: That's probably best. \| cast Thunderwave at those three, using a level 2 spell slot. So there's a loud boom, and a wave of thunderous force sweeps over the skeletons. They need to make DC 15 Constitution saves. Jared: They all fail! Maeve: Because \| used a level 2 slot, that's 15 Thun- der damage, and they're pushed 10 feet away. Jared: They're pushed back and shattered. Maeve: Excellent! Four down, six to go. Jared: And it's Gareth's turn at last! Phillip: How many of them are within 30 feet of me? Jared: All six. Phillip: \| hold up my Holy Symbol and ask Pelor the Holy Sun to sear these skeletons. They need to make DC 15 Wisdom saves. Jared (rolling): Oh, those are not good numbers. None of them even got close. Phillip: They each take 18 Radiant damage and--- Jared: Never mind the "and." Pelor does indeed smite these skeletons! They're silhouetted for a moment in a burst of brilliant light, then they van- ish, leaving only their broken swords behind. Areas of Effect. Spells and many other ef- fects in the game fill a specific area that is defined by the rules, like the 15-foot Cube of the Thunderwave spell. See the rules glos- sary for more on areas of effect. ye \[\| Saving Throws. The skeletons make Consti- tution saving throws to resist the Thunder- wave spell. When they fail those saves, they take damage and are pushed, as defined in ' that spell's description. Damage and Hit Points. The skeletons have 13 Hit Points each, so the spells and attacks in this example deal enough damage to de- stroy them. If a spell or an attack dealt less than 13 damage, the DM would keep track of the damage each skeleton has taken until it is reduced to 0 Hit Points and is destroyed. \% Saving Throws. Gareth's Sear Undead is a class feature (see chapter 3). As with Mira- bella's Thunderwave spell, Sear Undead forces the skeletons to make a saving throw. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME, 31 paves eee CHAPTER (CREATING A CHARACTER "7 5e OU CAN MAKE A CHARACTER FOR 'DUNGEONS & DRAGONS using the build- \~, ing blocks in this book. Your character is a combination of game statistics, roleplaying hooks, and your imagination. You choose a class (such as Fighter or Wizard), a background (such as Sailor or Acolyte), and a species (such as Human or Elf). You also invent the personality and appearance of your character. Once completed, your character serves as your avatar in the D&D multiverse. # Get Ready Before you dive into character creation, there are a few things to do to get ready, as explained below. # Talk With Your Dm Start by talking with your Dungeon Master about the type of D&D game they plan to run. If the DM draws inspiration from Greek myth, for example, you might choose a different direction for your character than if the DM is planning for swash- buckling on the high seas. Think about the kind of adventurer you want to play in this game. If you don't know where to begin, look at the character illustrations in this book for inspiration. # Choose A Character Sheet You'll record the main details of your character on a character sheet. Throughout this chapter, we use the term "character sheet" to mean whatever you use to track your character's details, whether it's a printed character sheet (like the one shown on the following pages), a digital character sheet like the one on D&D Beyond, or plain paper. Choose which- ever style of sheet works for you, and then embark on creating a character! = \_ # Session Zero Some Dungeon Masters start a campaign with a "session zero," an initial gathering focused on creating characters and setting expectations, including topics to avoid as well as those to embrace. A session zero provides a great oppor- tunity to talk to the other players and the DM and decide whether your characters know one another, how they met, and what sorts of quests the group might undertake together. 7, # Create Your Character Here are the steps to make a character; each step is explored in detail in this chapter: 1: Choose a Class. Every adventurer is a member of a class. A class broadly describes a character's vocation, special talents, and favored tactics. 2: Determine Origin. A character's origin includes two elements: background and species. How did the character spend the years leading up to a life of adventure? Who are the character's ancestors? You can also choose your character's languages. 3: Determine Ability Scores. Much of what your character does in the game depends on the char- acter's six abilities. 4: Choose an Alignment. Alignment is a shorthand for your character's moral compass. 5: Fill in Details. Using the choices you've made, fill in the remaining details on your character sheet. On the character sheet on the following pages, many spaces are labeled with a number that corre- sponds with one of those steps. STEP 1: CHOOSE A CLASS Choose a class, and write it on your character sheet. The Class Overview table summarizes the classes. See chapter 3 for the classes' details. CLass OVERVIEW Class Likes... Primary Ability Complexity Barbarian Battle Strength Average Bard Performing Charisma High Cleric Gods Wisdom Average Druid Nature Wisdom High Fighter Weapons Strength Low or Dexterity Monk Unarmed \_ Dexterity High combat and Wisdom Paladin Defense Strength Average and Charisma Ranger --- Survival Dexterity Average and Wisdom Rogue Stealth Dexterity Low Sorcerer Power Charisma High Warlock Occult lore Charisma High Wizard Spellbooks Intelligence Average # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER \| og HIT POINTS Hit pice \| DEATH \| SAVES 'CHARACTER NAME 5\<2SP= = i \_ TEMP SPENT Successes ' BACKGROUND CLASS pra 4 = - CURRENT MAX MAX FAILURES! SPECIE: SUBCLASS y, iH D= \_4 DUNGEONS & DRAGONS ' --------------- Gq si ir if PEED i 7 SIZE \| (passive Per \[PRoriciency BONUS INTELLIGENCE SS INITIATIVE 'SPEE CEPTION ( ) \| A. Mooirien ied @ © WEAPONS & DAMAGE CANTRIPS H O **Saving Throw Name Atk Bonus /DC Damage & Type Notes STRENGTH H r O ™ Arcana (2) \| = O** Investigation i. \| movin "F/G Nature 1 O **Saving Throw LO** \_\_ Religion - \| fo} 6 Athletics (2) \| LT; WISDOM ' \| NS (on / MODIFIER 'Saving Throw (5) Acrobatics @) coms Lo © \_\_ Sleight of Hand fom S \_\_ Stealth CONSTITUTION Lu SCORE MODIFIER / \ Om! oO Ss MODIFIER L O \_\_ Saving Throw Insight Medicine \_ Perception O\_ Ou 2: fo} Survival CHARISMA MODIFIER © saving Throw ja ET: 2 HEROIC INSPIRATION Gy lL fe} 8 Animal Handling 2) N a © \_\_ Saving Throw fe} 6 Deception 2) SS \| O \_\_ Intimidation y bee oa \|} © \_\_ Performance @ srecies TRAITS Lo Persuasion EQUIPMENT TRAINING & PROFICIENCIES ARM OinG Slight \<\>Medium \<pHeavy \<\> Shields WEAPONS 34 a em a abi \> # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER --- yp ie SPELLCASTING ABILITY # Spellcasting Modifier /e@ © »rrearANce # Spell Save Dc © srett stots Total Expended OOOO \| Levers Lever # Spell Attack Bonus Lever2 # Oo0 Ooo Levers Lever 3 Lever 6 ie Total Expended O00 O09 oO Lever Lever 8 Leverg Total Expended oOo \> S Z 2 @ sackstory & PERSONALITY @ cantrips & PREPARED SPELLS Level Name li {j iH tt {i Casting Time Range oc OR oc Se \>Re De DR cea Fe Oe re de de Oe DR Oe DR Fe OR re \> Oe c OR \> OR dk cong \> Op Concentration, Ritual & Required Material Notes ou ae - ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou ou nu ou on ou ou Qu on rR OM R OM ou # 2 Om | | @ wncuaces @ equipment \| Magic Item Attunement | | Kk 2 TAK © 202 Wicards of the Coast LLC. tustrations by Richard Wnitters. # 6703898000001 En # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER # 35 A Balanced Party The classic D&D party comprises a Cleric, Fighter, Rogue, and Wizard. Those four classes have the longest history in the game, but more importantly, they bring a balanced mix of capa- bilities to adventures. You're welcome to use that party setup or modify it using these guidelines: Cleric. Replace with Bard or Druid; Fighter. Replace with Barbarian, Monk, Paladin, or Ranger Rogue. Replace with Bard or Ranger Wizard. Replace with Bard, Sorcerer, or Warlock \_ WRITE YOUR LEVEL Write your character's level on your character sheet. Typically, a character starts at level 1 and advances in level by adventuring and gaining Expe- rience Points (XP). Write Your XP. Also record your Experience Points. A level 1 character has 0 XP. Starting at a Higher Level. Your DM might start you at a higher level. If you start at level 3 or higher, write your chosen subclass on your character sheet. See the "Starting at Higher Levels" section later in the chapter for more information. # Note Armor Training Your class might give you training with certain categories of armor. Note your armor training on your character sheet. Armor training with a kind of armor means you can wear that armor effectively, gaining defensive bonuses from it. The categories of armor are described in chapter 6. HoLp THAT THOUGHT You'll fill in more details about your class later. Choosing your class is the most important decision you make in creating a character, and it informs many of the decisions you make in later steps. You'll return to your class's description in chapter 3 sev- eral more times before you're done. STEP 2: DETERMINE ORIGIN Determining your character's origin involves choos- ing a background, a species, and two languages. A character's background represents the place and occupation that were most formative for the character. The combination of background, species, and languages provides fertile soil for your imagina- tion as you ponder your character's earliest days. CHOOSE A BACKGROUND Choose your character's background, and write it on your character sheet. You can choose any of the backgrounds detailed in chapter 4, and your DM might offer additional backgrounds as options. # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER The background you choose influences step 3, when you determine your character's ability scores, If you're having trouble choosing, the Ability Scores and Backgrounds table shows which backgrounds benefit which ability scores. Look for your class's primary ability there. # Ability Scores And Backgrounds Ability Backgrounds Strength Artisan, Entertainer, Farmer, Guard, Noble, Sailor, Soldier Dexterity Artisan, Charlatan, Criminal, Entertainer, Guide, Sailor, Scribe, Soldier, Wayfarer Charlatan, Criminal, Farmer, Guide, Hermit, Merchant, Sage, Soldier Acolyte, Artisan, Criminal, Guard, Merchant, Noble, Sage, Scribe Wisdom Acolyte, Farmer, Guard, Guide, Hermit, Sage, Sailor, Scribe, Wayfarer Constitution Intelligence Charisma Acolyte, Charlatan, Entertainer, Hermit, Merchant, Noble, Wayfarer Record Your Feat. A background gives you a feat, which grants your character particular capabilities. Feats are detailed in chapter 5. Write the feat on your character sheet. Note Proficiencies. Your background gives proficiency in two skills and with one tool. Record this information on your character sheet. Your class also gives proficiencies. Check your class description in chapter 3 and note the proficien- cies on your character sheet. On the sample character sheet, you can indicate proficiency in skills and saving throws by marking the circle next to them. The features table in your class description shows your Proficiency Bonus (described in chapter 1), which is +2 for a level 1 character. Note this number on your character sheet. You'll fill in other numbers connected to these proficiencies in step 5. CHOOSE STARTING EQUIPMENT Your background and class both provide starting equipment. Any coins that you gain at this step can be immediately spent on equipment from chapter 6. In addition, you can have one trinket at no cost (see the Trinkets table at the end of this chapter). Record your chosen equipment on your character sheet. Equipment is described in chapter 6, but for now you can just write it all down and look up the specifics in that chapter later. There's also space on the sample character sheet to note any coins you have left after purchasing your equipment, as well as treasure you acquire on your adventures. # Choose A Species Choose a species for your character. The following species options are detailed in chapter 4: Aasimar, Dragonborn, Dwarf, Elf, Gnome, Goliath, Halfling, Human, Orc, and Tiefling. Once you've chosen a species, write it on your character sheet. Then re- cord your species' traits. Your character's size and Speed are determined by the character's species; record these in the appropri- ate places on your character sheet as well (you may write just the first letter of your size). # Imagine Your Past And Present Let your character's background and species inspire how you imagine their past. That past fed into the character's present. With that in mind, consider an- swers to the following questions as your character: - Who raised you? - Who was your dearest childhood friend? - Did you grow up with a pet? - Have you fallen in love? If so, with whom? - Did you join an organization, such as a guild or religion? If so, are you still a member of it? What elements of your past inspire you to go on adventures now? # Choose Languages Your character knows at least three languages: Common plus two languages you roll or choose from the Standard Languages table. Knowledge of a language means your character can communicate in it, read it, and write it. Your class and other features might also give you languages. The Standard Languages table lists languages that are widespread on D&D worlds. Every player character knows Common, which originated in the planar metropolis of Sigil, the hub of the multiverse. The other standard languages originated with the first members of the most prominent species in the worlds of D&D and have since spread widely. # Standard Languages 1d12 Language Origin --- Common Sigil 1 Common Sign Language \_ Sigil 2. Draconic Dragons 3-4 Dwarvish Dwarves 5-6 Elvish Elves 7 Giant Giants 8 = Gnomish Gnomes 9 Goblin Goblinoids 10-11 Halfling Halflings 12. Ore Orcs Consider How Your CHOICES COMBINE TO SET YOUR CHARACTER ON THE PATH TO ADVENTURE. The Rare Languages table lists languages that are either secret or derived from other planes of exis- tence and thus less widespread in the worlds of the Material Plane. Some features let a character learn a rare language. # Rare Languages Language Origin Abyssal Demons of the Abyss Celestial Celestials Deep Speech Aberrations Druidic Druidic circles Infernal Devils of the Nine Hells Primordial\* Elementals Sylvan The Feywild Thieves' Cant Various criminal guilds Undercommon The Underdark \*Primordial includes the Aquan, Auran, Ignan, and Terran dialects. Creatures that know one of these dialects can communicate with those that know a different one. # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 37 STEP 3: DETERMINE ABILITY SCORES To determine your character's ability scores, you first generate a set of six numbers using the instruc- tions below and then assign them to your six abili- ties. Chapter 1 explains what each ability means. GENERATE YOUR SCORES Determine your ability scores by using one of the following three methods. Your DM might prefer you to use a particular one. Standard Array. Use the following six scores for your abilities: 15, 14, 13, 12, 10, 8. Random Generation. Roll four d6s and record the total of the highest three dice. Do this five more times, so you have six numbers. Point Cost. You have 27 points to spend on your ability scores. The cost of each score is shown on the Ability Score Point Costs table. For example, a score of 14 costs 7 of your 27 points. ABILITY SCORE PoINT Costs Score Cost Score Cost 8 0 12 4 9 1 13 5 10 2 14 7 af\] 3 15 9 ASSIGN # Ability Scores Once you've generated six scores, assign them to Strength, Dexterity, Constitution, Intelligence, Wis- dom, and Charisma, keeping in mind your class's primary ability. Fill in the ability modifiers as well. If you're using the Standard Array option, consult the Standard Array by Class table for suggestions on where to assign scores for your character's class. The table puts the highest scores in a class's main abilities. If you used a different method to gener- ate the scores, you may still use this table to guide where you place your highest and lowest scores. = BACKGROUNDS AND SPECIES FROM OLDER Books Backgrounds in older D&D books don't include ability score adjustments. If you're using a back- ground from an older book, adjust your ability scores by increasing one score by 2 and a differ- ent one by 1, or increase three scores by 1. None of these increases can raise a score above 20. Similarly, species in older books include ability score increases. If you're using a species from an older book, ignore those increases and use only the ones given by your background. Also, if the background you choose doesn't pro- vide a feat, you gain an Origin feat of your choice. ad # CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER STANDARD ARRAY BY CLASS Str. Dex. Con. Int. Wis. Cha. Class Barbarian 15 13 14 10 12 8 Bard 8 14 12 13 10 15 Cleric 14 8 13 10 15 12 Druid 8 12 14 13 15 10 Fightér 15 14 #+13 8 10 12 Monk 12 15 13 10 14 8 Paladin 15 10 13 8 12 14 Ranger 12 15 13 8 14 10 Rogue 12 15 13 14 10 8 Sorcerer 10 13 14 8 12 15 Warlock 8 14 13 12 10 15 Wizard 8 12 13 # 15 14 10 Apjust ABILITY SCORES After assigning your ability scores, adjust them ac- cording to your background. Your background lists three abilities; increase one of those scores by 2 and a different one by 1, or increase all three by 1. None of these increases can raise a score above 20. Some players like to increase their class's primary ability, while others prefer to increase a low score. # Determine Ability Modifiers Finally, determine your ability modifiers using the Ability Scores and Modifiers table. Write the modi- fier next to each of your scores. # Ability Scores And Modifiers Score Modifier Score Modifier 3 -4 12-13 +1 4-5 -3 14-15 +2 6-7 -2 16-17 +3 8-9 -1 18-19 +4 10-11 +0 20 +5 DESCRIBE APPEARANCE AND PERSONALITY Ability scores are an essential part of the rules, but they can be more than that. Once you've assigned your ability scores, give some thought to what those scores might say about your character's appearance and personality. A very strong character with low Charisma might look and behave differently from a charismatic character with low Strength. The fol- lowing tables of descriptive words give suggestions of how you might describe your character based on having a high or low score in an ability. Note your character's appearance and personality on your character sheet. STRERGTH 1d4\_ High Str. 1d4\_ Low Str. 1 Muscular STEP 4: CHOOSE AN ALIGNMENT Choose your character's alignment from the options Weak below, and note it on your character sheet. Slight D&D assumes that player characters aren't of an evil alignment. Check with your DM before making an evil character. Sinewy Self-conscious Indirect RWN Z 3 Protective 4 Direct THE NINE ALIGNMENTS A creature's alignment broadly describes its ethical 1d4 High Dex 144. Low Dex. attitudes and ideals. Alignment is a combination of is two factors: one identifies morality (good, evil, or DEXTERITY 1 Lithe 1 jittery neutral), and the other describes attitudes toward 2 Dynamic 2 Clumsy order (lawful, chaotic, or neutral). 3. Fidgety 3. Hesitant The summaries of the alignments below describe 4. `\Poised 4`{=tex} Unsteady the typical behavior of a creature with that align- ment; individuals can vary from that behavior. Lawful Good (LG). Lawful Good creatures en- CONSTITUTION donee do As ean thing as expected by society. 1d4\_ High Con. 1d4\_ Low Con. Someone who fights injustice and protects the inno- 1 Energetic 1 Frail cent without hesitation is probably Lawful Good. 2 Hale 2 Squeamish Neutral Good (NG). Neutral Good creatures do the 2 best they can, working within rules but not feeling 3. Hearty 3 Lethargic bound by them. A kindly person who helps others 4 Stable 4 Fragile according to their needs is probably Neutral Good. Chaotic Good (CG). Chaotic Good creatures act as INTELLIGENCE their conscience directs with little regard for what 1d4 High Int. 1d4 Low Int. others expect. A rebel who waylays a cruel baron's 1) peaaue ais -AptlBae tax collectors and uses the stolen money to help the poor is probably Chaotic Good. 2 Logical 2 Mlogical Lawful Neutral (LN). Lawful Neutral individuals 3. Informative 3. Uninformed act in accordance with law, tradition, or personal i codes. Someone who follows a disciplined rule of #, Curious #, crnvelous life---and isn't swayed either by the demands of Wispom those in need or by the temptations of evil---is probably Lawful Neutral. 1d4\_ High Wis. 144 Low Wis. Neutral (N). Neutral is the alignment of those who 1 Serene 1 Rash prefer to avoid moral questions and don't take sides, 2 Considerate 2 Distracted doing what seems best at the time. Someone who's; a bored by moral debate is probably Neutral. 3 Attentive 3 Oblivious Chaotic Neutral (CN). Chaotic Neutral creatures 4 Wary 4 Naive follow their whims, valuing their personal freedom above all else. A scoundrel who wanders the land CHARISMA living by their wits is probably Chaotic Neutral. 1d4 High Cha. 1d4 Low Cha. Lawful Evil (LE). Lawful Evil creatures method- 1 Charming 1 Pedantic ically take what they want within the limits of a. code of tradition, loyalty, or order. An aristocrat ex- 2 Commanding 2 Humorless ploiting citizens while scheming for power is proba- 3 Hilarious 3 Reserved bly Lawful Evil. 4 Inspiring 4 Tactless Neutral Evil (NE). Neutral Evil is the alignment of those who are untroubled by the harm they cause as rr \_ they pursue their desires. A criminal who robs and UNALIGNED CREATURES murders as they please is probably Neutral Evil. Most creatures that lack the capacity for rational Chaotic Evil (CE). Chaotic Evil creatures act with thought don't have alignments; they are un- arbitrary violence, spurred by their hatred or blood- aligned, Sharks are savage predators, for exam- lust. A villain pursuing schemes of vengeance and F ple, but they aren't evil; they are unaligned. havoc is probably Chaotic Evil. E \~ - CHAPTER \| CREATING A CHARACTER 39 oe Step 5: Frit IN DETAILS Now fill in the rest of your character sheet. RECORD CLASS FEATURES Look at your class's feature table in chapter 3, and write down the level 1 features. The class features are detailed in that same chapter. Some class features offer choices. Make sure to read all your features and make any offered choices. FILL IN NUMBERS Note these numbers on your character sheet. Saving Throws. For the saving throws you have proficiency in, add your Proficiency Bonus to the appropriate ability modifier and note the total. Some players also like to note the modifier for sav- ing throws they're not proficient in, which is just the relevant ability modifier. Skills. For skills you have proficiency in, add your Proficiency Bonus to the ability modifier associated with that skill, and note the total. You might also wish to note the modifier for skills you're not profi- cient in, which is just the relevant ability modifier. ALIGNMENTS MIGHT BE VISUALIZED AS A GRID LIKE THIS\~ Passive Perception. Sometimes your DM will de- termine whether your character notices something ALONG WITH CREATURES THAT EMBODY THOSE ALIGNMENTS without asking you to make a Wisdom (Perception) check; the DM uses your Passive Perception instead. Passive Perception is a score that reflects a general awareness of your surroundings when you're not actively looking for something. Use this formula to determine your Passive Perception score: ALIGNMENT AND PERSONALITY Alignment can shape a character's personality, goals, and core beliefs. Looking at the two elements of an alignment, you can use the lists below to in- spire details of your character's personality. Passive Perception = 10 + Wisdom (Perception) ley PERSONALITY TRAITS BY ALIGNMENT " " x. 3 check modifier Alignment 1d4 Associated Trait sai AM Boasthil Include all modifiers that apply to your Wisdom a i on u (Perception) checks. For example, if your character mpusive has a Wisdom of 15 and proficiency in the Percep- 3 Rebellious tion skill, you have a Passive Perception of 14 (10 + 2 4 Self-absorbed for your Wisdom modifier + 2 for proficiency). Good 1 Compassionate Hit Points. Your class and Constitution modifier 2 Helpful determine your Hit Point maximum at level 1, as 3 "Panes shown on the Level 1 Hit Points by Class table. 4 Ki ind Leve 1 Hit Points By CLAss Evil 1 Dishonest fe ag. Class Hit Point Maximum 2 Vengeful. 3 Cruel Barbarian 12 + Con. modifier 4 Greedy Fighter, Paladin, or Ranger 10 + Con. modifier Lawful 1 Cooperative Bard, Cleric, Druid, Monk, 8 + Con. modifier 2 Loyal Rogue, or Warlock by 3 Judgmental Sorcerer or Wizard 6 + Con. modifier 4 M i \| ethodical The character sheet includes room to note your \| Neutral 1 Selfish current Hit Points when you take damage, as well as Ni 2 Disinterested any Temporary Hit Points you might gain. There's } 3 Laconic also space to track Death Saving Throws. \ Pragmatic