# Shield Of Faith Level 1 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a prayer scroll) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes A shimmering field surrounds a creature of your choice within range, granting it a +2 bonus to AC for the duration. SHILLELAGH Transmutation Cantrip (Druid) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (mistletoe) Duration: 1 minute A Club or Quarterstaff you are holding is imbued with nature's power. For the duration, you can use your spellcasting ability instead of Strength for the attack and damage rolls of melee attacks using that CUAPTER 7! SPFRIIS weapon, and the weapon's damage die becomes a d8, If the attack deals damage, it can be Force damage or the weapon's normal damage type (your choice), The spell ends early if you cast it again or if you let go of the weapon. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage die changes when you reach levels 5 (d10), 11 (d12), and 17 (2d6). # Shining Smite Level 2 Transmutation (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a creature with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute The target hit by the strike takes an extra 2d6 Radi- ant damage from the attack. Until the spell ends, the target sheds Bright Light in a 5-foot radius, attack rolls against it have Advantage, and it can't benefit from the Invisible condition. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 2. SHOCKING GRASP Evocation Cantrip (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Lightning springs from you to a creature that you try to touch. Make a melee spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target takes 1d8 Lightning dam- age, and it can't make Opportunity Attacks until the start of its next turn. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d8 when you reach levels 5 (2d8), 11 (3d8), and 17 (4d8). SILENCE Level 2 Illusion (Bard, Cleric, Ranger) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes For the duration, no sound can be created within or pass through a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point you choose within range. Any creature or object entirely inside the Sphere has Immunity to Thunder damage, and creatures have the Deaf- ened condition while entirely inside it. Casting a spell that includes a Verbal component is impossible there. Sitent IMAGE CAN CONCOCT ILLUSIONS oF THE MUNOANE # Ano The Whimsical # Silent Image Level 1 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of fleece) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create the image of an object, a creature, or some other visible phenomenon that is no larger than a 15-foot Cube. The image appears at a spot within range and lasts for the duration. The image is purely visual; it isn't accompanied by sound, smell, or other sensory effects. Asa Magic action, you can cause the image to move to any spot within range. As the image changes location, you can alter its appearance so that its movements appear natural for the image. For example, if you create an image of a creature and move it, you can alter the image so that it ap- pears to be walking. Physical interaction with the image reveals it to be an illusion, since things can pass through it. A crea- ture that takes a Study action to examine the image can determine that it is an illusion with a successful Intelligence (Investigation) check against your spell save DC. If a creature discerns the illusion for what it is, the creature can see through the image. SIMULACRUM Level 7 Illusion (Wizard) Casting Time: 12 hours Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (powdered ruby worth 1,500+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled You create a simulacrum of one Beast or Humanoid that is within 10 feet of you for the entire casting of the spell. You finish the casting by touching both the creature anda pile of ice or snow that is the same size as that creature, and the pile turns into the simulacrum, which is a creature. It uses the game statistics of the original creature at the time of casting, except it is a Construct, its Hit Point maximum is half as much, and it can't cast this spell. The simulacrum is Friendly to you and creatures you designate. It obeys your commands and acts on your turn in combat. The simulacrum can't gain lev- els, and it can't take Short or Long Rests. If the simulacrum takes damage, the only way to restore its Hit Points is to repair it as. you takea Long Rest, during which you expend components worth 100 GP per Hit Point restored. The simula- crum must stay within 5 feet of you for the repair. The simulacrum lasts until it drops to O Hit Points, at which point it reverts to snow and melts away. If you cast this spell again, any simulacrum you created with this spell is instantly destroyed. SLEEP Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a pinch of sand or rose petals) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Each creature of your choice in a 5-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point within range must suc- ceed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Inca- pacitated condition until the end of its next turn, at which point it must repeat the save. If the target fails the second save, the target has the Unconscious condition for the duration. The spell ends on a target if it takes damage or someone within 5 feet of it takes an action to shake it out of the spell's effect. Creatures that don't sleep, such as elves, or that have Immunity to the Exhaustion condition auto- matically succeed on saves against this spell. # Sleet Storm Level 3 Conjuration (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a miniature umbrella) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Until the spell ends, sleet falls in a 40-foot-tall, 20-foot-radius Cylinder centered on a point you choose within range. The area is Heavily Obscured, and exposed flames in the area are doused. Ground in the Cylinder is Difficult Terrain. When a creature enters the Cylinder for the first time on aturn or starts its turn there, it must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw or have the Prone condition and lose Concentration. Au \_ CHAPTER \| SPELLS Agal? SLow Level 3 Transmutation (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a drop of molasses) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You alter time around up to six creatures of your choice in a 40-foot Cube within range. Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or be af- fected by this spell for the duration. An affected target's Speed is halved, it takes a -2 penalty to AC and Dexterity saving throws, and it can't take Reactions. On its turns, it can take either an action or a Bonus Action, not both, and it can make only one attack if it takes the Attack action. If it casts a spell with a Somatic component, there is a 25 percent chance the spell fails as a result of the target making the spell's gestures too slowly. i An affected target repeats the save at the end of each of its turns, ending the spell on itself on a success. SORCEROUS BuRST /: Cantrip Evocation (Sorcerer) ' Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Component: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You cast sorcerous energy at one creature or object within range. Make a ranged attack roll against the target. On a hit, the target takes 1d8 damage of a type you choose: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Poison, Psychic, or Thunder. If you roll an 8 on a d8 for this spell, you can roll another d8, and add it to the damage. When you cast this spell, the maximum number of these d8s you can add to the spell's damage equals your spell- casting ability modifier. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d8 when you reach levels 5 (2d8), 11 (3d8), and 17 (4d8). SPARE THE DYING Necromancy Cantrip (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 15 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Choose a creature within range that has 0 Hit Points and isn't dead. The creature becomes Stable. Cantrip Upgrade. The range doubles when you reach levels 5 (30 feet), 11 (60 feet), and 17 (120 feet).eo 71 SPELLS A HUMAN Dauio uses SPEAK WITH ANIMALS TO CHAT WITH WIS BEST BEAR FRIEND. SPEAK WITH ANIMALS Level 1 Divination (Bard, Druid, Ranger, Warlock) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: 10 minutes For the duration, you can comprehend and verbally communicate with Beasts, and you can use any of the Influence action's skill options with them. Most Beasts have little to say about topics that don't pertain to survival or companionship, but at minimum, a Beast can give you information about nearby locations and monsters, including whatever it has perceived within the past day. SPEAK WITH DEAD Level 3 Necromancy (Bard, Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 10 feet Components: V, S, M (burning incense) Duration: 10 minutes You grant the semblance of life to a corpse of your choice within range, allowing it to answer ques- tions you pose, The corpse must have a mouth, and this spell fails if the deceased creature was Undead when it died. The spell also fails if the corpse was the target of this spell within the ast 10 days. JeSPEW ESINC i Until the spe! ends, you can ask the corpse up to five questions. 'The corpse knows only what it knew in life, including the languages it knew. Answers are usually brief, cryptic, or repetitive, and the corpse js under no compulsion to offer a truthful answer if you are antagonistic toward it or it recognizes you 3s an enemy. This spell doesn't return the creature's soul to its body, only its animating spirit. Thus, the corpse can't learn new information, doesn't compre- hend anything that has happened since it died, and can't speculate about future events. SpEAK WITH PLANTS Level 3 Transmutation (Bard, Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V,S Duration: 10 minutes You imbue plants in an immobile 30-foot Emana- tion with limited sentience and animation, giving them the ability to communicate with you and fol- low your simple commands. You can question plants about events in the spell's area within the past day, gaining information about creatures that have passed, weather, and other circumstances. You can also turn Difficult Terrain caused by plant growth (such as thickets and undergrowth) into ordinary terrain that lasts for the duration. Or you can turn ordinary terrain where plants are present into Difficult Terrain that lasts for the duration. The spell doesn't enable plants to uproot them- selves and move about, but they can move their branches, tendrils, and stalks for you. Ifa Plant creature is in the area, you can commu- nicate with it as if you shared a common language. SPIDER CLIMB Level 2 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a drop of bitumen and a spider) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch gains the ability to move up, down, and across vertical surfaces and along ceilings, while leaving its hands free. The target also gains a Climb Speed equal to its Speed. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level about 2. Spike GRowTH Level 2 Transmutation (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (seven thorns) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes The ground in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point within range sprouts hard spikes and thorns. The area becomes Difficult Terrain for the duration. When a creature moves into or within the area, it takes 2d4 Piercing damage for every 5 feet it travels. The transformation of the ground is camouflaged to look natural. Any creature that can't see the area when the spell is cast must take a Search action and succeed on a Wisdom (Perception or Survival) check against your spell save DC to recognize the terrain as hazardous before entering it. SprriT GUARDIANS Level 3 Conjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a prayer scroll) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes Protective spirits flit around you in a 15-foot Ema- nation for the duration. If you are good or neutral, their spectral form appears angelic or fey (your choice). If you are evil, they appear fiendish. When you cast this spell, you can designate crea- tures to be unaffected by it. Any other creature's Speed is halved in the Emanation, and whenever the Emanation enters a creature's space and whenever a creature enters the Emanation or ends its turn there, the creature must make a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d8 Ra- diant damage (if you are good or neutral) or 348 Necrotic damage (if you are evil). On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage. A creature makes this save only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 3. SPIRITUAL WEAPON Level 2 Evocation (Cleric) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a floating, spectral force that resembles a weapon of your choice and lasts for the duration. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS # A 319 = be ii. The force appears within range in a space of your choice, and you can immediately make one melee spell attack against one creature within 5 feet of the force. On a hit, the target takes Force damage equal to 1d8 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. As a Bonus Action on your later turns, you can move the force up to 20 feet and repeat the attack against a creature within 5 feet of it. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for every slot level above 2. # Staggering Smite Level 4 Enchantment (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a creature with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: Instantaneous The target takes an extra 4d6 Psychic damage from the attack, and the target must succeed on a Wis- dom saving throw or have the Stunned condition until the end of your next turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The extra damage increases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 4. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS ola: OLIATH CLERIC CASTS SPIRITUAL WEAPON INJBAT TLE, AN UMBER HULK ' i. a STARRY WISP Evocation Cantrip (Bard, Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You launch a mote of light at one creature or object within range. Make a ranged spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target takes 1d8 Radiant damage, and until the end of your next turn, it emits Dim Light in a 10-foot radius and can't benefit from the Invisible condition. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d8 when you reach levels 5 (2d8), 11 (3d8), and 17 (4d8). STEEL WIND STRIKE Level 5 Conjuration (Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: S, M (a Melee w Duration: Instantaneous on worth 1+ SP): casting and. Choose up to You flourish the weapon used i then vanish to strike like the five creatures you can see within range. Make a melee spell attack against each target. Ona hit, a target takes 6d10 Force damage.: You then teleport to an unoccupied space you can see within 5 feet of one of the targets. # Stinking Cloud Level 3 Conjuration (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a rotten egg) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a 20-foot-radius Sphere of yellow, nau- seating gas centered on a point within range. The cloud is Heavily Obscured. The cloud lingers in the air for the duration or until a strong wind (such as the one created by Gust of Wind) disperses it. Each creature that starts its turn in the Sphere must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or have the Poisoned condition until the end of the current turn. While Poisoned in this way, the crea- ture can't take an action or a Bonus Action. STONE SHAPE Level 4 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (soft clay) Duration: Instantaneous You touch a stone object of Medium size or smaller ora section of stone no more than 5 feet in any di- mension and form it into any shape you like. For ex- ample, you could shape a large rock into a weapon, statue, or coffer, or you could make a small passage through a wall that is 5 feet thick. You could also shape a stone door or its frame to seal the door shut. The object you create can have up to two hinges and a latch, but finer mechanical detail isn't possible. STONESKIN Level 4 Transmutation (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (diamond dust worth 100+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour Until the spell ends, one willing creature you touch has Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slash- ing damage. # Storm Of Vengeance Level 9 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 1 mile Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Acchurning storm cloud forms for the duration, centered on a point within range and spreading to a radius of 300 feet. Each creature under the cloud when it appears must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 2d6 Thunder damage and have the Deafened condition for the duration. At the start of each of your later turns, the storm produces different effects, as detailed below. Turn 2. Acidic rain falls. Each creature and object under the cloud takes 4d6 Acid damage. Turn 3. You call six bolts of lightning from the cloud to strike six different creatures or objects beneath it. Each target makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 10d6 Lightning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Turn 4. Hailstones rain down. Each creature un- der the cloud takes 2d6 Bludgeoning damage. Turns 5-10. Gusts and freezing rain assail the area under the cloud. Each creature there takes 1d6 Cold damage. Until the spell ends, the area is Difficult Terrain and Heavily Obscured, ranged attacks with weapons are impossible there, and strong wind blows through the area. SUGGESTION Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, M (a drop of honey) Duration: Concentration, up to 8 hours You suggest a course of activity---described in no more than 25 words---to one creature you can see within range that can hear and understand you. The suggestion must sound achievable and not involve } anything that would obviously deal damage to the ) target or it allies. For example, you could say, "Fetch the key to the cult's treasure vault, and give the key to me." Or you could say, "Stop fighting, leave this library peacefully, and don't return." The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition for the dura- tion or until you or your allies deal damage to the target. The Charmed target pursues the suggestion\ to the best of its ability. The suggested activity can \|: continue for the entire duration, but if the sug-; gested activity can be completed in a shorter time, } the spell ends for the target upon completing it. CHAPTER7\|SPELLS 32 ABERRANT Spirit (BEHOLOERKIN) # Summon Aberration Level 4 Conjuration (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a pickled tentacle and an eye- ball in a platinum-inlaid vial worth 400+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth an aberrant spirit. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Aberrant Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose Beholderkin, Mind Flayer, or Slaad. The creature resembles an Aberration of that kind, which determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, it shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your ver- bal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. # Summon Beast Level 2 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a feather, tuft of fur, and fish tail inside a gilded acorn worth 200+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth a bestial spirit. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Bestial Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose an environment: Air, Land, or 999. CHAPTER7 \| SPELLS (SS === Se # Aberrant Spirit Medium Aberration, Neutral AC 11 + the spell's level HP 40 + 10 for each spell level above 4 Speed 30 ft.; Fly 30 ft. (hover; Beholderkin only) MOD SAVE MOD save Dex 10 +0 +0 CoNn15 +2 42 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHA6 -2 -2 # Mod Save | StR 16 +3 +3 Int 16 +3 +3 Immunities Psychic Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages Deep Speech, understands the languages you know CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS Regeneration (Slaad Only). The spirit regains 5 Hit Points at the start of its turn if it has at least 1 Hit Point. Whispering Aura (Mind Flayer Only). At the start of each of the spirit's turns, the spirit emits psionic energy if it doesn't have the Incapacitated condition. Wisdom Saving Throw: DC equals your spell save DC, each crea- ture (other than you) within 5 feet of the spirit. Failure: 2d6 Psychic damage. ACTIONS Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of attacks equal to half this spell's level (round down). Claw (Slaad Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d10 + 3 + the\ spell's level Slashing damage, and the target can't re- \| gain Hit Points until the start of the spirit's next turn. Eye Ray (Beholderkin Only). Ranged Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, range 150 ft. Hit: 1d8 + 3+ the spell's level Psychic damage. Psychic Slam (Mind Flayer Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 + 3 + the spell's level Psychic damage. oe --- Water. The creature resembles an animal of your choice that is native to the chosen environment, which determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it fakes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Stoi. Lise the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. PRR MaKe SUMMON CELESTIAL Level 5 Conjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a reliquary worth 500+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth a Celestial spirit. It manifests in an angelic form in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Celestial Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose Avenger or Defender. Your choice determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's Cevestiat Spigir level for the spell's level in the stat block. (Avencer) ------ \* BESTIAL SPIRIT ---) (Cerestiat SPIRIT Small Beast, Neutral Large Celestial, Neutral AC 11 + the spell's level AC 11 + the spell's level + 2 (Defender only) HP 20 (Air only) or 30 (Land and Water only) + 5 for HP 40 + 10 for each spell level above 5 each spell level above 2 \| Speed 30 ft., Fly 40 ft. Speed 30 ft.; Climb 30 ft. (Land only); Fly 60 ft. (Air \| MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| only); Swim 30 ft. (Water only) Str 16 +3 +3 Dex 14 +2 42 Conlé +3 43 \| MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Int 10 +0 +0 Wis 14 2 2 (a 16 str 18 44 +4 Dex 11 40 40 Conte 43 43 SEE CHa ae Int 4 -3 -3 Wis 14 +2 +2 CHa5 -3 -3 Resistances Radiant Immunities Charmed, Frightened `\y`{=tex} \| Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 12 \| \| Languages understands the languages you know Languages Celestial, understands the languages you \| CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) know } CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus \| Traits: ae ) \| Flyby (Air Only). The spirit doesn't provoke Opportu- ACTIONS \| nity Attacks when it flies out of an enemy's reach. Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of attacks Pack Tactics (Land and Water Only). The spirit has equal to halfthis spell's level (roundidown)- Advantage on an attack roll against a creature if at least Radiant Bow (Avenger Only). Ranged Attack Roll: Bonus one of the spirit's allies is within 5 feet of the creature equals your spell attack modifier, range 600 ft. Hit: 2d6 and the ally doesn't have the Incapacitated condition. + 2+ the spell's level Radiant damage. Water Breathing (Water Only). The spirit can breathe only underwater. Radiant Mace (Defender Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bo- nus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1410 + 3 + the spell's level Radiant damage, and the spirit can choose itself or another creature it can see within 10 feet of the target. The chosen creature gains 1d10 Temporary Hit Points. ACTIONS Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of Rend at- tacks equal to half this spell's level (round down). Rend. Melee Atta. Roll: Bonus equals your spell at- tack modifier, reac 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 +4 + the spell's level Piercing damage. Healing Touch (1/Day). The spirit touches another crea- ture. The target regains Hit Points equal to 2d8 + the spell's level. 294 \| SUMMON CONSTRUCT Level 4 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a lockbox worth 400+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth the spirit of a Construct. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Construct Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose a material: Clay, Metal, or Stone. The creature resembles an animate statue (you determine the appearance) made of the chosen material, which determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. SUMMON DRAGON Level 5 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (an object with the image of a dragon engraved on it worth 500+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth a Dragon spirit. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Draconic Spirit stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS # Construct Spirit Construct Spirit (Stone) Z Medium Construct, Neutral AC 13 + the spell's level HP 40 + 15 for each spell level above 4 Speed 30 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 18 +4 +4 Dex 10 +0 +0 Conl8 +4 +44 Int 14 +2 +2 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHAS -3 -3 Resistances Poison | Immunities Charmed, Exhaustion, Frightened, Paralyzed, Poisoned Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages Understands the languages you know CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS Heated Body (Metal Only). A creature that hits the spirit with a melee attack or that starts its turn in a grapple with the spirit takes 1d10 Fire damage. Stony Lethargy (Stone Only). When a creature starts its turn within 10 feet of the spirit, the spirit can target it with magical energy if the spirit can see it. Wisdom Saving Throw: DC equals your spell save DC, the target. Failure: Until the start of its next turn, the target can't make Opportunity Attacks, and its Speed is halved. ACTIONS Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of Slam attacks equal to half this spell's level (round down). Slam. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 + 4 + the spell's level Blud- geoning damage. REACTIONS ae Berserk Lashing (Clay Only). Trigger: The spirit takes damage from a creature. Response: The spirit makes a Slam attack against that creature if possible, or the spirit moves up to half its Speed toward that creature without provoking Opportunity Attacks. Se To ------\_ SumMon ELEMENTAL Level 4 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (air, a pebble, ash, and water inside a gold-inlaid vial worth 400+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth an Elemental spirit. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Elemental Spirit stat block. When you cast Decent Rae the spell, choose an element: Air, Earth, Fire, or Wa- (Coro) ter. The creature resembles a bipedal form wreathed in the chosen element, which determines certain de- tails in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to 0 Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In, combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, \> on but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It ' obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. ae as a ) Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's \| DRACONIC SPIRIT level for the spell's level in the stat block. \[i Large Dragon, Neutra' AC 14 + the spell's level ELEMENTAL SPIRIT ) HP 50 + 10 for each spell level above 5 Medium Elemental, Neutral \| Speed 30 ft., Fly 60 ft., Swim 30 ft. AC 11+ the spel' level\] Sony: sae Con 17 oe a HP 50 + 10 for each spell level above 4 Sra 19 seaueds DEX. Azad ON ae Speed 40 ft.; Burrow 40 ft. (Earth only); Fly 40 ft. \| / Inr 10 +0 +0 Wis 14 +2 +2 CHA14 42 42 (hover; Air only); Swim 40 ft. (Water only)\ \| Resistances Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Poison ang a5 an Seats me = --- se wt { i;: ii \| Immunities Charmed, Frightened, Poisoned \| \| Senses Blindsight 30 ft., Darkvision 60 ft., Int 4 -3 -3 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHAI6 +343 \| \| Passive Perception 12 ' as Vellanadaeesdolt Resistances Acid (Water only), Lightning and Thunder } \| Languages Draconic, understands the languages y (Air only), Piercing and Slashing (Earth only), \| know Profici Bonus Immunities Fire (Fire only), Poison; Exhaustion, au \|; CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) Paralyzed, Petrified, Poisoned Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 \| TRatts h the sontt Languages Primordial, understands the languages you Shared Resistances. When you summon e spirit, naa \| choose one of its Resistances. You have Resistance to CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) the chosen damage type until the spell ends. i RAITS AcTIONS k barorhendae Amorphous Form (Air, Fire, and Water on See Mulsiattack. The spirit makes) sinumberof Renda F can move through a space as narrow as 1 inch wide tacks equal to half the spell's level (round down), and it withoutit counting as Difficult Terrain. uses Breath Weapon. TIONS Rend. Melee Attack: Bonus equals your spell attack Ac: a ee modifier, reach 10 feet. Hit: 1d6 + 4 + the spell's level ec ree sal a Pe a am \| s level 4 Piercing damage. equal to half this spel Fee i p acl Breath Weapon. Dexterity Saving Throw: DC equals your Slam. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell \* \| spell save DC, each creature in a 30-foot Cone. Failure: modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d10 + 4 + the spell's level ': 2d6 damage of a type this spirit has Resistance to (your Bludgeoning Ce (Water only), Lightning © \| choice when you cast the spell). Success: Half damage. (Air only), or Fire (Fire only) damage. ER 7 \| SPELLS SUMMON FEY Level 3 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a gilded flower worth 300+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth a Fey spirit. It manifests in an unoc- cupied space that you can see within range and uses the Fey Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose a mood: Fuming, Mirthful, or Tricksy. The creature resembles a Fey creature of your choice marked by the chosen mood, which determines cer- tain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. SUMMON FIEND Level 6 Conjuration (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a bloody vial worth 600+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth a fiendish spirit. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Fiendish Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose Demon, Devil, or Yugoloth. Sa CHAPTER! SPELLS Small Fey, Neutral | AC 12 + the spell's level } HP 30 + 10 for each spell level above 3 \| Speed 30 ft., Fly 30 ft. MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE \| Stk 13 +1 +1 Dex 16 +3 +3 Conl4 +2 +2 Wis 11 +0 +0 CHA16 +3 +3 | Int 14 42 42 | | Immunities Charmed | Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 | Languages Sylvan, understands the languages you | know CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) ACTIONS Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of Fey Blade attacks equal to half this spell's level (round down). Fey Blade. Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 2d6 + 3 + the spell's \| level Force damage. Bonus ACTIONS } \| Fey Step. The spirit magically teleports up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space it can see. Then one of the follow- ing effects occurs, based on the spirit's chosen mood: | Fuming. The spirit has Advantage on the next attack roll it makes before the end of this turn. Mirthful. Wisdom Saving Throw: DC equals your spell save DC, one creature the spirit can see within 10 feet of itself. Failure: The target is Charmed by you and the spirit for 1 minute or until the target takes any damage. Tricksy. The spirit fills a 10-foot Cube within 5 feet of it with magical Darkness, which!asts until the end of its next turn, i i i i The creature resembles a Fiend of the chosen type, which determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is anallytoyouand / your allies. In combat, the crea- ture shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its move- ment to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. Fienois Spirit (Devir) # Fiendish Spirit f \|! | Large Fiend, Neutral | AC 12+ the spell's level HP 50 (Demon only) or 40 (Devil only) or 60 (Yugoloth only) + 15 for each spell level above 6 Speed 40 ft.; Climb 40 ft. (Demon only); Fly 60 ft. (Devil only) MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 13 +1 +1 Dex 16 +3 +3 CON15 +2 +2 Int 10 +0 +0 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHAI6 +3 +3 Resistances Fire Immunities Poison; Poisoned Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages Abyssal, Infernal, Telepathy 60 ft. CR None (XP 0; P8 equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS Death Throes (Demon Only). When the spirit drops to 0 Hit Points or the spell ends, the spirit explodes. Dex- terity Saving Throw: DC equals your spell save DC, each creature in a 10-foot Emanation originating from the spirit. Failure: 230 plus this spell's level Fire damage. | Success: Half darv.aze. Devil's Sight (Devil Only). Magical Darkness doesn't impede the spirit's Darkvision. Magic Resistance. The spirit has Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. ACTIONS Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of attacks equal to half this spell's level (round down). Bite (Demon Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d12 + 3 + the spell's level Necrotic damage. Claws (Yugoloth Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 + 3 + the spells level Slashing damage. Immediately after the at- tack hits or misses, the spirit can teleport up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space it can see. Fiery Strike (Devil Only). Melee or Ranged Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. or range 150 ft. Hit: 2d6 + 3 + the spell's level Fire damage. SUMMON UNDEAD Level 3 Necromancy (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (a gilded skull worth 300+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You call forth an Undead spirit. It manifests in an unoccupied space that you can see within range and uses the Undead Spirit stat block. When you cast the spell, choose the creature's form: Ghostly, Putrid, or Skeletal. The spirit resembles an Undead creature with the chosen form, which determines certain details in its stat block. The creature disappears when it drops to O Hit Points or when the spell ends. The creature is an ally to you and your allies. In combat, the creature shares your Initiative count, but it takes its turn immediately after yours. It obeys your verbal commands (no action required by you). If you don't issue any, it takes the Dodge action and uses its movement to avoid danger. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Use the spell slot's level for the spell's level in the stat block. Unoeao Spirit (Guosriy) f UNDEAD SPirIT Medium Undead, Neutral AC 11 + the spell's level HP 30 (Ghostly and Putrid only) or 20 (Skeletal only) + 10 for each spell level above 3 Speed 30 ft.; Fly 40 ft. (hover; Ghostly only) ' MOD SAVE MOD SAVE MOD SAVE Str 12 +1 +1 Dex 16 +3 +3 Conl5 +2 +2 Int 4 -3 -3 Wis 10 +0 +0 CHa 9 -1 -1 Immunities Necrotic, Poison; Exhaustion, Frightened, Paralyzed, Poisoned Senses Darkvision 60 ft., Passive Perception 10 Languages Understands the languages you know | CR None (XP 0; PB equals your Proficiency Bonus) TRAITS Festering Aura (Putrid Only). Constitution Saving Throw: DC equals your spell save DC, any creature (other than you) that starts its turn within a 5-foot Emanation origi- nating from the spirit. Failure: The creature has the Poi- soned condition until the start of its next turn. Incorporeal Passage (Ghostly Only). The spirit can move through other creatures and objects as if they i. ©. ee sive 7 \| SPELLS were Difficult Terrain. If it ends its turn inside an object, it is shunted to the nearest unoccupied space and takes 1d10 Force damage for every 5 feet traveled. ACTIONS Multiattack. The spirit makes a number of attacks equal to half this spell's level (round down). Deathly Touch (Ghostly Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bo- nus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d8 + 3 + the spell's level Necrotic damage, and the target has the Frightened condition until the end of its next turn. Grave Bolt (Skeletal Only). Ranged Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, range 150 ft. Hit: 2d4 + 3+ the spell's level Necrotic damage. Rotting Claw (Putrid Only). Melee Attack Roll: Bonus equals your spell attack modifier, reach 5 ft. Hit: 1d6 + 3 + the spell's level Slashing damage. If the target has the Poisoned condition, it has the Paralyzed condition until the end of its next turn. SUNBEAM; Level 6 Evocation (Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self a Components: V, S, M (a magnifying glass) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You launch a sunbeam in a 5-foot-wide, 60-foot-long Line. Each creature in the Line makes a Constitu- tion saving throw. Ona failed save, a creature takes 6d8 Radiant damage and has the Blinded condition until the start of your next turn. On a successful save, it takes half as much damage only. Until the spell ends, you can take a Magic action to create a new Line of radiance. For the duration, a mote of brilliant radiance shines above you. It sheds Bright Light in a 30-foot radius and Dim Light for an additional 30 feet. This light is sunlight. SUNBURST Level 8 Evocation (Cleric, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a piece of sunstone) Duration: Instantaneous Brilliant sunlight flashes in a 60-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point you choose within range. Each creature in the Sphere makes a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 12d6 Radiant damage and has the Blinded condition for 1 minute. On a successful save, it takes half as much damage only. Acreature Blinded by this spell makes another Constitution saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. This spell dispels Darkness in its area that was created by any spell. SwiFT QUIVER Level 5 Transmutation (Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a Quiver worth 1+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute When you cast the spell and as a Bonus Action until it ends, you can make two attacks with a weapon that fires Arrows or Bolts, such as a Longbow or SYMBOL i Level 7 Abjuration (Bard, Cleric, Druid, Wizard) j Casting Time: 1 minute \| Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (powdered diamond worth \| i 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) i Duration: Until dispelled or triggered i You inscribe a harmful glyph either ona surface \| (such as a section of floor or wall) or within an \| object that can be closed (such as a book or chest). \| \| The glyph can cover an area no larger than 10 feet \| in diameter. If you choose an object, it must remain in place; if it is moved more than 10 feet from where \| |, you cast this spell, the glyph is broken, and the spell ends without being triggered. The glyph is nearly imperceptible and requires a successful Wisdom (Perception) check against your spell save DC to notice. When you inscribe the glyph, you set its trigger \|; and choose which effect the symbol bears: Death, Discord, Fear, Pain, Sleep, or Stunning. Each one is \| explained below. Set the Trigger. You decide what triggers the glyph when you cast the spell. For glyphs inscribed on a J surface, common triggers include touching or step- ping on the glyph, removing another object cover- ing it, or approaching within a certain distance of it. For glyphs inscribed within an object, common trig- fi gers include opening that object or seeing the glyph. You can refine the trigger so that only creatures of certain types activate it (for example, the glyph could be set to affect Aberrations). You can also set conditions for creatures that don't trigger the glyph, such as those who say a certain password. Once triggered, the glyph glows, filling a 60-foot-radius Sphere with Dim Light for 10 min- utes, after which time the spell ends. Each creature \> in the Sphere when the glyph activates is targeted by its effect, as is a creature that enters the Sphere for the first time on a turn or ends its turn there. A creature is targeted only once per turn. d Death, Each target makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 10d10 Necrotic damage on a failed \* save or half as much damage on a successful save. Discord. Each target makes a Wisdom saving creatures for 1 minute. During this time, it is 7 \| pable of meaningful communication and has Disad-\_ = | Pain. Each target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or have the Incapacitated condition for 1 minute.: Sleep. Each target must succeed on a Wisdom sav- ing throw or have the Unconscious condition for 10 minutes. A creature awakens if it takes damage or if someone takes an action to shake it awake. Stunning. Each target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Stunned condition for 1 minute. SyNAPTIC STATIC Level 5 Enchantment (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You cause psychic energy to erupt at a point within range. Each creature in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point makes an Intelligence saving throw, taking 8d6 Psychic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. On a failed save, a target also has muddled thoughts for 1 minute. During that time, it subtracts 1d6 from all its attack rolls and ability checks, as well as any Constitution saving throws to maintain Concentration. The target makes an Intelligence saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success. THE LEGENDARY WITCH TASHA USES HER SPELL, TASHA'S Bues.inc Cauioron, to