"Player'S Handbook r CONTENTS Welcome to Adventure What You Need Using This Boo! Worlds of Adventure.. Ch. 1: Playing the Game. Player or DM?.. Rhythm of Play An Ongoing Game.. The Six Abilities. 10 D20 Tests... 10 Ability Checks. 10 Saving Throws Attack Rolls... Advantage/Disadvantage. Proficiency Action Bonus ction: Reactions... 15 Social Interaction 6 Exploration.19 Vision and Light. Hiding...... Interacting with Objects.. The Order of Combat Movement and Position Making an Attack.. Ranged Attacks Melee Attacks. Mounted Comba' Underwater Combat Damage and Healing Hit Points. Damage Rolls. Critical Hits. Saving Throws and Damag Damage Types..... Resistance and Vulnerability Immunity.. Healing... Dropping to O Hit Points Temporary Hit Point: Conditions... Ch. 2: Creating a Character Create Your Character... Level Advancement Starting at Higher Level: Multiclassin; Trinkets... Ch. 3: Character Classe: Barbarian... Path of the Berserker... Path of the Wild Heart. Path of the World Tree Path of the Zealot. Bard. Bard Spell List College of Dance Cortesy PhotoScan: ADD OSC: Dark Owl College of Glamour.. College of Lore College of Valo Cleric... Cleric Spell Lis! Life Domain. Light Domain Trickery Domain War Domain Druid. Druid Spell Lis: Circle of the Land. Circle of the Moon. Circle of the Sea. Circle of the Star: Fighter... Champion Eldritch Knigh' Warrior of Merc: Warrior of Shadow....... Warrior of the Elements Warrior of the Open Hand Paladin. Paladin Spell Lis! Oath of Devotio Oath of Glory.. Oath of the Ancients Oath of Vengeance. Range Ranger Spell Lis Beast Master... Fey Wanderer Gloom Stalker. Hunter...... Rogue... 28 Arcane Trickste! 32 Assassin Soulknife. 135 Thief. Sorcere Metamagic Options. Sorcerer Spell Lis: Aberrant Sorcery Clockwork Sorcery Draconic Sorcery Wild Magic Sorcery. Warlock...... Eldritch Invocation Options. Warlock Spell Lis Archfey Patron. Celestial Patron. Fiend Patron. Great Old One Patron. Wizard...... Wizard Spell List. Abjurerens Diviner Ch. 4: Character Origins Origin Components... Background Descriptions Species Descriptions. Aasimar.... Dragonborn Ch. 5: Feats... Feat Descriptions Origin Feats... General Feats... Fighting Style Feat: Properties.. Mastery Properties Adventuring Gear.. Mounts and Vehicles Services Magic Items Crafting Equipment Ch. 7: Spells... Gaining Spells. Casting Spells. Spell Descriptions App. A: The Multiverse The Material Realm Transitive Planes..... The Inner Planes. The Outer Planes. App. B: Creature Stat Blocks.......... App. C: Rules Glossary....... Index...... INTRODUCTION # Welcome To Adventure = ee THIS STORY BEGAN 50 YEARS AGO, AND YOU'RE PART OF it. In the 1970s, Gary Gygax and Dave Arneson createda game of make-believe that fused rules with storytelling. There'd never been anything like it: a game in which each player made their own fantasy character and teamed up with their friends to go on quests. One person served as the narrator and referee---the Dungeon Master---and did every- thing they could to challenge and delight the other players. That game was, of course, the first version of Dungeons & Dragons, and you're now reading its latest version. Over the decades, millions of people have played D&D, and scores of writers, game designers, and artists have made their mark on it through its various editions. When our team released the current edition in 2014, we were humbled by how many of you loved it. This revised version of itis a salute to all of you---those of you who've been playing D&D for years, those of you who've contributed to the game through your feedback, and those of you who are about to experience the joy of playing it for the first time. As a teenager, I met both Cary and Dave. I even spent an entire day with Gary, and we did what all D&D fans do: share stories about our adventures in the D&D multiverse. Tinvite you to embark on such adventures anew. Share as much laughter as you can with your friends. Use only the rules that serve your fun, and always follow your group's bliss. So many people have been enjoying the magic of D&D Sor half a century, Let's keep it blazing for another 50 years! ---Jeremy Crawford; RE YOU READY TO EMBARK ON FANTASY { LA adventures with your friends? DUNGEONS 7 & DRAGONS invites you to play imaginary adventurers who delve into dungeons and other perilous locations together, face fearsome foes such as dragons, and build friendships forged amid fan- tastical dangers. Fueled by imagination and rules, D&D invites you to adopt a fantasy persona---a mighty Fighter, a cunning Rogue, a faithful Cleric, a magical Wizard, or something else---and then solve problems, fight monsters, and visit wondrous places. There's no winning and losing in D&D, at least not the way those terms are usually understood. Together you and friends create an exciting story of adventurers who confront perils. Sometimes an 7 adventurer might come to a tragic end. Even so, the other adventurers can search for powerful magic to revive their fallen comrade, or the character's player might create a new character to carry on. No matter what happens, if everyone has a good time and cre- ates a memorable story, they all win. WHAT You NEED Here's what you need to play D&D with one or more friends (a typical group has five people): Dungeon Master. One person takes on the role of the Dungeon Master (DM), the game's lead story- teller and referee. The DM creates adventures for the players' characters, who navigate its hazards and decide which paths to explore. The DM also narrates what they experience and plays the friends and foes they meet along the way. Even though the DM challenges the adventurers, the DM always strives to delight the whole group. Players. Each player creates an adventurer who teams up with the other players' adventurers. Working together, the group might explore a dark dungeon, a ruined city, a haunted castle, a lost temple, a lava-filled mountain, or another location described by the DM. The adventurers also solve puzzles, talk with other characters, battle fantas- tic monsters, and discover magic items and other treasure---all while supporting each other's fun. You also need these resources, either in physical form or on DnDBeyond.com: Player's Handbook. This book is your essential reference for the game's rules, and it guides you through making an adventurer of your own. Dungeon Master's Guide and Monster Manual. The first of these books guides the DM through creat- ing and running adventures, and the second holds hundreds of monsters to fill those adventures. P= LEARN BY WATCHING A great way to learn the basics of D&D is to watch people play it. The Internet offers videos of D&D play that show off the tremendous range of possi- bilities the game offers. As you watch, pay atten- tion to the ways that some players help make the game fun for everyone in their group. The only audience you need to entertain when you're play- Dice. You need a set of polyhedral dice (shown in chapter 1). You can find dice like these in game stores and from online retailers. Dice-rolling apps are also available. Character Sheet. To keep track of important in- formation about your character, you need a char- acter sheet, which can be as simple as a piece of paper you write notes on or as feature-rich as a digital record. The DM might also find these accessories useful: DM Screen. Many DMs like to use a screen to shield their notes and dice rolls from players. It's bad manners to peek over the screen! Miniatures and Battle Grid. Some DMs use a bat- tle grid and miniatures to run combat encounters, since they help everyone visualize the action. A battle grid can be anything marked out in l-inch squares, from disposable sheets of paper to poster maps. And miniatures range from simple tokens to detailed figurines. Online maps and miniatures are also available, including on DnDBeyond.com. Using THIS BOOK Here's what you'll find in this book: Chapter 1: Playing the Game. The first chapter ex- plains the fundamentals of the game, with exam- ples to help you understand how to play. Chapter 2: Creating a Character. Chapter 2 walks you through the steps of character creation. Chapter 3: Character Classes. Characters' capa- bilities are largely determined by class, such as Fighter or Wizard. Chapter 3 offers twelve classes to choose from, along with forty-eight subclasses. Chapter 4: Character Origins. Background and species are key elements in defining a character's origin, which further shapes the character's abil- ities beyond the choice of class. Background and species options are presented in chapter 4. Chapter 5: Feats. The feats in chapter 5 are special features that characters gain as part of their back- ground and class. Chapter 6: Equipment. Armor, weapons, and ad- venturing gear are found in chapter 6. Chapter 7: Spells. This chapter contains descrip- tions of the spells that spellcasters can cast. Appendix A: The Multiverse. Here you'll find an overview of the magical multiverse where D&D adventures take place. Appendix B: Creature Stat Blocks. This appendix brims with game information for creatures that certain characters can befriend or transform into. Appendix C: Rules Glossary. The game's main rules terminology is summarized in this appendix, making it an invaluable reference during play. What's NEW IN THE 2024 VERSION? This is the 2024 version of the fifth edition Play- er's Handbook. ` y`{=tex}ou've read the 2014 version, much of this book will feel familiar, since the fun- damental rules of the game are the same. But the book contains many new or redesigned elements, and the versions of things in this book replace versions from older books. Here are highlights: Streamlined Rules. The game's rules have been streamlined and are now supported by a rules glossary. Easier Character Creation. Using chapter 2, mak- ing a character is easier than ever before. Enhanced Classes. In chapter 3, every class and subclass has been enhanced with new options. Reimagined Origins. Explored in chapter 4, a character's origin is now defined by back- ground and species, each of which has been redesigned. Expanded Feats. In chapter 5, feats have been re- designed, with many feats added. Upgraded Weapons, Tools, and Crafting. Mastery properties transform how weapon wielders use their weapons, and every character can enjoy new tool and crafting rules in chapter 6. Dazzling Spells. Chapter 7 bursts with new spells and old ones that have been enhanced. If you can't find a rule, check the index. If a rule's name has changed from what was printed in the 2014 Player's Handbook, the index points you to the new name. For example, if you look up Inspi- ration in the index, it points you to the rules for Heroic Inspiration in the rules glossary.: # Worlds Of Adventure The worlds of D&D glimmer with magic, monsters, and spectacular adventure. Launching from a foun- dation of medieval fantasy, these worlds soar with possibilities beyond those of our reality. D&D worlds exist in a multiverse and are con- nected to one another and to other planes of ex- istence. Some of the worlds have been published as official D&D settings, including the Greyhawk, Forgotten Realms, Dragonlance, Spelljammer, Planescape, Dark Sun, Eberron, and Ravenloft set- tings. Alongside these worlds are thousands more, created by generations of D&D players for their own games. Amid the richness of the multiverse, you might create a world of your own. The worlds of the multiverse share characteris- tics, but each world is set apart by its own history and geography. Your DM might set a campaign on one of these worlds or on a world of their own in- vention. Because there is so much variety among D&D worlds, check with your DM about the world of your upcoming adventures. INTRODUCTION \| WELCOME TO ADVENTURE ---aeeeiaias WHILE AOVENTURING IN THE DRAGONLANCE SETTING, THE SIBLINGS CARAMON MaveRE, RAISTLIN MAJERE, ANO KiTiARA UTH MaTaR PROVOKE THE RAGE OF A WYVERN # Chapter 1 # Playing The Game ™ MAGINATION IS A KEY INGREDIENT OF DUNGEONS & DRAGONS, a cooperative game. in which the characters that you roleplay em- bark on adventures together in fantasy worlds filled with monsters and magic. In D&D, the action takes place in the imaginations of the players, and it's narrated by everyone to- gether. Here's a glimpse at what that looks like: Jared (as Dungeon Master): After your long journey, Castle Ravenloft towers before you. Crumbling towers of stone---perhaps abandoned guardhouses---loom over the approach. Beyond them, you see a gaping chasm disappearing into deep fog below. A lowered drawbridge spans the chasm, its chains creaking in the wind. Stone gargoyles stare down at you from the high walls, and a pale light spills into the courtyard from the open castle doors beyond. Phillip (as Gareth): \| examine the gargoyles. \| have a feeling they're not just statues! Maeve (as Mirabella): \| want to see how sturdy the drawbridge is. Do \| think we can cross it, or is it going to collapse under our weight? Jared: All right, one at a time. Phillip, Gareth's look- ing at the gargoyles? Phillip: Yeah. Is there any hint they might be crea- tures and not just decorations? Jared: Make an Intelligence check. Phillip: Does my Investigation skill apply? Jared: Sure! Phillip (rolling a d20): Ugh. Seven. Jared: They look like decorations to you. And Maeve, Mirabella is examining the drawbridge? The adventure continues from there, relying on the DM's descriptions to set the scenes. Later in the chapter, other examples of play focus on certain aspects of D&D play: social interaction, exploration, and combat. = i RuLes GLOSSARY If you read a rules term in this book and want to know its definition, consult the rules glossary, which is appendix C. This chapter provides an overview of how to play D&D and focuses on the big picture. Many places in this chapter reference that glossary, Player OR DM? To play D&D, you need one person to be the Dun- geon Master and other players (three to six are best) to play adventurers. Which role is right for you? # Being A Player If you want to be one of the protagonists in your group's adventures, consider being a player. Here's what players do: Make a Character. Your character is your alter ego in the fantasy world of the game. After you read this chapter, use the rules in chapter 2 to create your character. Team Up. Your character joins the other players' characters to form an adventuring party. These adventurers are allies who face challenges and fantastical situations together. Each character brings distinctive capabilities, which ideally com- plement those of the other characters. Venture Forth. Your character's group explores locations and events presented by the DM. You can respond to them in any way you can imagine, guided by the rules in this book. Although the DM controls all the monsters you encounter, the DM isn't your adversary. The DM guides your party's journey as your characters become more powerful. # Being The Dungeon Master If you want to be the mastermind of the game, con- sider being the DM. Here's what DMs do: Build Adventures. You prepare the adventures that the players experience. In the Dungeon Master's Guide, you'll find advice for how to create adven- tures and even whole worlds. Guide the Story. You narrate much of the action during play, describing locations and creatures that the adventurers face. The players decide what their characters do as they navigate hazards and choose what to explore. Then you use a combina- tion of imagination and the game's rules to deter- mine the results of the adventurers' decisions. Adjudicate the Rules. You oversee how the group uses the game's rules, making sure the rules serve the group's fun. You'll want to read the rest of this chapter to understand those rules, and you'll find the rules glossary essential. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME RHYTHM OF PLAY The three main pillars of D&D play are social in- teraction, exploration, and combat. Whichever one you're experiencing, the game unfolds according to this basic pattern: 1: The Dungeon Master Describes a Scene. The DM tells the players where their adventurers are and what's around them (how many doors lead out of a room, what's on a table, and so on). 2: The Players Describe What Their Characters Do. Typically, the characters stick together as they travel through a dungeon or another envi- ronment. Sometimes different adventurers do different things: one adventurer might search a treasure chest while a second examines a mysterious symbol engraved on a wall and a third keeps watch for monsters. Outside combat, the DM ensures that every character has a chance to act and decides how to resolve their activity. In combat, the characters take turns. 3: The DM Narrates the Results of the Adventur- ers' Actions. Sometimes resolving a task is easy. If an adventurer walks across a room and tries to open a door, the DM might say the door opens and describe what lies beyond. But the door might be locked, the floor might hide a trap, or some other circumstance might make it challeng- ing for an adventurer to complete a task. In those cases, the DM might ask the player to roll a die to help determine what happens. Describing the re- sults often leads to another decision point, which brings the game back to step 1. This pattern holds during every game session (each time you sit down to play D&D), whether the adven- turers are talking to a noble, exploring a ruin, or fighting a dragon. In certain situations---particularly combat---the action is more structured, and every- one takes turns. a EXCEPTIONS SUPERSEDE GENERAL RULES General rules govern each part of the game. For example, the combat rules tell you that melee attacks use Strength and ranged attacks use Dexterity. That's a general rule, and a general rule is in effect as long as something in the game doesn't explicitly say otherwise. The game also includes elements---class fea- tures, feats, weapon properties, spells, magic items, monster abilities, and the like---that some- times contradict a general rule. When an excep- tion and a general rule disagree, the exception wins. For example, if a feature says you can make melee attacks using your Charisma, you can do so, even though that statement disagrees with the general rule. AN ONGOING GAME Sometimes a session of D&D is a complete game in itself (often called a "one-shot"), where you play a short adventure that lasts for just one session. More often, though, D&D sessions are connected in a longer adventure that takes several sessions to com- plete, and adventures can be strung together into a larger narrative called a campaign. A campaign is like a TV series, while an adventure is like a season of the series. And a game session is like a single episode---it might be self-contained, but it usually links to the larger plot if there is one. ADVENTURES An adventure might be created by the Dungeon Master or purchased (the examples of play in this chapter are inspired by a published adventure, Curse of Strahd). In either case, an adventure features a fantastic setting, such as an underground dungeon, a wondrous wilderness, or a magic-filled city. It in- cludes a cast of nonplayer characters controlled by the DM. Often one of the NPCs is a villain whose agenda drives much of an adventure''s action. During an adventure, the adventurers explore environments, events, and creatures presented by the DM. Battles, traps, negotiations, mysteries, and more arise during these explorations. Adventures vary in length and complexity. A short adventure might present only a few challenges and take only one session to complete. A long ad- venture might involve many combats, interactions, and other challenges and take dozens of sessions. CAMPAIGNS A campaign is a series of adventures with a consis- tent group of adventurers following the narrative. Some campaigns are episodic, where each adven- ture is its own tale and not much besides the player characters links it to the next one. Other campaigns involve long-running plots, a cast of recurring NPCs, and themes that span multiple adventures, leading toward a climactic conclusion. As with adventures, a DM might create a cam- paign from scratch, assemble a campaign from published adventures, or mix homemade material with published material. And the campaign might take place in a world of the DM's creation or ina published campaign setting, such as the Forgotten Realms or Greyhawk (the latter is described in the Dungeon Master's Guide). = Round Down Whenever you divide or multiply a number in the \* game, round down if you end up with a fraction, even if the fraction is one-half or greater. Some rules make an exception and tell you to round up. "\_ # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME DIcE Dice add randomness to the game. They help deter- mine whether characters and monsters are success- ful at the things they attempt. DicE NOTATION The dice used in D&D are referred to by the letter d followed by the die's number of sides: d4, d6, d8, d10, d12, and d20. For instance, a d6 is a six-sided die (the cube that many games use). The illustration on this page shows what each die looks like. When you need to roll dice, the rules tell you how many dice to roll of a certain type, along with any numbers to add or subtract. For example, "3d8 + 5" means you roll three eight-sided dice, add them to- gether, and add 5 to the total. # Percentile Dice The rules sometimes refer to a d100. While such dice exist, the common way to roll 1d100 uses a pair of ten-sided dice numbered from 0 to 9, known as percentile dice. One die---that you designate before rolling---gives the tens digit, and the other gives the ones digit. If you roll a 7 for the tens digit and a 1 for the ones digit, for example, the number rolled is 71. Two Os represent 100. Some ten-sided dice are numbered in tens (00, 10, 20, and so on), making it easier to distinguish the tens digit from the ones digit. In this case, a roll of 70 and 1is 71, and 00 and 0 is 100. D3 The same d notation appears in the expression "1d3," even though it's rare to find dice with only three sides. To simulate rolling 1d3, roll 1d6 and di- vide the number rolled by 2 (round up). What ARE DICE For? Here are the most common uses of dice in D&D. D20 Test The 20-sided die (d20) is the most important die you'll use in the game. It's central to the core me- chanic---called D20 Tests---the game uses to deter- mine whether creatures succeed or fail at the things (Ones Digit) INTERPRETING DIE ROLLS IN THE STORY Part of the fun of D&D is interpreting what die rolls mean in the story. The randomness that dice bring often introduces the unexpected: an expert fails, a novice succeeds, or any number of other twists. When a D20 Test or another roll produces a surprise, the Dungeon Master often gives a fun description of what happened. If you're a player, look for opportunities to interpret your charac- ter's die rolls and describe why things unfolded unexpectedly or even humorously. \~ \_ they attempt during the game (see "D20 Tests" later in this chapter). You roll a d20 whenever your character tries to do something that the DM decides has a chance of both success and failure. The higher your roll, the more likely it is that you succeed. DAMAGE The most common use for dice other than the d20 is to determine damage. When you make a suc- cessful attack roll (one kind of D20 Test), you roll damage to see how effective the attack is. When you cast a spell, you might also roll damage. Different weapons and spells use different dice for damage. For example, a Dagger uses 1d4, a Greataxe uses 1d12, and a Fireball spell uses 8d6. # Random Tables Occasionally, you'll see a table that uses a die roll to generate a random result. On these tables, you'll see a die expression, such as d10 or d100, in the header of the leftmost column. Roll that die, and find the number you rolled (or a range containing that num- ber) in that column. Read across that row for the result. For example, the Trinkets table in chapter 2 uses a d100. # Percentage Chances Sometimes you might see a rule describing a per- centage chance of something happening. For exam- ple, a rule might say there is a 5 percent chance of something happening. You can determine whether that thing happens by rolling percentile dice; if the roll is equal to or less than the percentage chance (a 01 to 05, in this example), it happens. Dio (Tens Digit) # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME 9 THE Six ABILITIES All creatures---characters and monsters---have six abilities that measure physical and mental charac- teristics, as shown on the Ability Descriptions table. Asitity DESCRIPTIONS Ability Score Measures... Strength Physical might Dexterity Agility, reflexes, and balance Constitution Health and stamina Reasoning and memory Intelligence Wisdom Perceptiveness and mental fortitude Charisma Confidence, poise, and charm # Ability Scores Each ability has a score from 1 to 20, although some monsters have a score as high as 30. The score represents the magnitude of an ability. The Ability Scores table summarizes what the scores mean. ABILITY SCORES Score Meaning 1 This is the lowest a score can normally go. If an effect reduces a score to 0, that effect explains what happens. 2-9 This represents a weak capability. 10-11 This represents the human average. 12-19 This represents a strong capability. 20 This is the highest an adventurer's score can go unless a feature says otherwise. 21-29 This represents an extraordinary capability. 30 This is the highest a score can go. # Ability Modifiers Each ability has a modifier that you apply whenever you make a D20 Test with that ability (explained in "D20 Tests"). An ability modifier is derived from its score, as shown in the Ability Modifiers table. ABitity MODIFIERS Score Modifier Score Modifier 1 -5 16-17 43 2-3 -4 18-19 +4 4-5 -3 20-21 +5 6-7 -2 22-23 +6 8-9 -\] 24-25 +7 10-11 +0 26-27 +8 12-13 4\] 28-29 +9 14-15 +2 30 +10 # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME --- # D20 Tests When the outcome of an action is uncertain, the game uses a d20 roll to determine success or failure. These rolls are called D20 Tests, and they come in three kinds: ability checks, saving throws, and at- tack rolls. They follow these steps: 1: Roll 1d20. You always want to roll high. If the roll has Advantage or Disadvantage (described later in this chapter), you roll two d20s, but you use the number from only one of them---the higher one if you have Advantage or the lower one if you have Disadvantage. 2: Add Modifiers. Add these modifiers to the num- ber rolled on the d20: - The Relevant Ability Modifier. This chapter and the rules glossary explain which ability modifiers to use for various D20 Tests. + Your Proficiency Bonus If Relevant. Each crea- ture has a Proficiency Bonus, a number added when making a D20 Test that uses something, such as a skill, in which the creature has proficiency. See "Proficiency" later in this chapter. Circumstantial Bonuses and Penalties. A class feature, a spell, or another rule might give a bo- nus or penalty to the die roll. Compare the Total to a Target Number. If the total of the d20 and its modifiers equals or ex- ceeds the target number, the D20 Test succeeds. Otherwise, it fails. The Dungeon Master deter- mines target numbers and tells players whether their rolls are successful. The target number for an ability check or a saving throw is called a Difficulty Class (DC). The target number for an attack roll is called an Armor Class (AC), which appears on a character sheet or in a stat block (see the rules glossary). gs # Ability Checks An ability check represents a creature using talent and training to try to overcome a challenge, such as forcing open a stuck door, picking a lock, enter- taining a crowd, or deciphering a cipher. The DM and the rules often call for an ability check when a creature attempts something other than an attack that has a chance of meaningful failure. When the outcome is uncertain and narratively interesting, the dice determine the result. # Ability Modifier An ability check is named for the ability modifier it uses: a Strength check, an Intelligence check, and so on. Different ability checks are called for in differ- ent situations, depending on which ability is most relevant. See the Ability Check Examples table for examples of each check's use. A D20 Test CAN RESULT IN A ORAMATIE SUCCESS, # A Simple Accomplishment, Or A Catastrophe. 1. # Ability Check Examples Ability Make a Check To... Strength Lift, push, pull, or break something Dexterity Move nimbly, quickly, or quietly Constitution Push your body beyond normal limits Intelligence \| Reason or remember Wisdom Notice things in the environment or in creatures' behavior Charisma Influence, entertain, or deceive # Proficiency Bonus Add your Proficiency Bonus to an ability check when the DM determines that a skill or tool pro- ficiency is relevant to the check and you have that proficiency. For example, if a rule refers to a Strength (Acrobatics or Athletics) check, you can add your Proficiency Bonus to the check if you have proficiency in the Acrobatics or Athletics skill. See "Proficiency" later in this chapter for more informa- tion about skill and tool proficiencies. DIFFICULTY CLass The Difficulty Class of an ability check represents the task's difficulty. The more difficult the task, the higher its DC. The rules provide DCs for certain checks, but the DM ultimately sets them. The Typi- cal Difficulty Classes table presents a range of possi- ble DCs for ability checks. TyPicat DIFFICULTY CLASSES Task Difficulty DC Task Difficulty Dc Very easy 5 Hard 20 Easy 10 Very hard 25 Medium 15 Nearly impossible 30 Savine THROWS A saving throw---also called a save---represents an attempt to evade or resist a threat, such as a fiery explosion, a blast of poisonous gas, or a spell trying to invade your mind. You don't normally choose to make a save; you must make one because your char- acter or a monster (if you're the DM) is at risk. A save's result is detailed in the effect that caused it. If you don't want to resist the effect, you can choose to fail the save without rolling. # Ability Modifier Saving throws are named for the ability modifiers they use: a Constitution saving throw, a Wisdom saving throw, and so on. Different saving throws are used to resist different kinds of effects, as shown on the Saving Throw Examples table. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME ei 12 SAVING THROW EXAMPLES Ability Make a Save To... Physically resist direct force Strength Dexterity Dodge out of harm's way Constitution Endure a toxic hazard Intelligence Recognize an illusion as fake Wisdom Resist a mental assault Charisma Assert your identity # Proficiency Bonus You add your Proficiency Bonus to your saving throw if you have proficiency in that kind of save. See "Proficiency" later in this chapter. DIFFICULTY CLass The Difficulty Class for a saving throw is deter- mined by the effect that causes it or by the DM. For example, if a spell forces you to make a save, the DC is determined by the caster's spellcasting ability and Proficiency Bonus. Monster abilities that call for saves specify the DC. # Attack Rolls An attack roll determines whether an attack hits a target. An attack roll hits if the roll equals or ex- ceeds the target's Armor Class. Attack rolls usually occur in battle, described in "Combat" later in this chapter, but the DM might also ask for an attack roll in other situations, such as an archery competition. ABILITY MODIFIER The Attack Roll Abilities table shows which ability modifier to use for different types of attack rolls. # Attack Roll Abilities Ability Attack Type Strength Melee attack with a weapon or an Un- armed Strike (see the rules glossary) Dexterity Ranged attack with a weapon Varies Spell attack (the ability used is deter- mined by the spellcaster's spellcasting feature, as explained in chapter 7) Some features let you use different ability modifiers from those listed. For example, the Finesse property (see chapter 6) lets you use Strength or Dexterity with a weapon that has that property. # Proficiency Bonus You add your Proficiency Bonus to your attack roll when you attack using a weapon you have profi- ciency with, as well as when you attack with a spell. See "Proficiency" later in this chapter for more in- formation about weapon proficiencies. # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME a ARMOR CLASS A creature's Armor Class represents how well the creature avoids being wounded in combat. The AC of a character is determined at character creation (see chapter 2), whereas the AC of a monster ap- pears in its stat block. Calculating AC. All creatures start with the same base AC calculation: Base AC = 10 + the creature's Dexterity modifier Acreature's AC can then be modified by armor, magic items, spells, and more. Only One Base AC. Some spells and class features give characters a different way to calculate their AC. A character with multiple features that give dif ferent ways to calculate AC must choose which one to use; only one base calculation can be in effect for a creature. ROLLING 20 oR 1 If you roll a 20 on the d20 (called a "natural 20") for an attack roll, the attack hits regardless of any modifiers or the target's AC. This is called a Critical Hit (see "Combat" later in this chapter). If you roll a 1 on the d20 (a "natural 1") for an at- tack roll, the attack misses regardless of any modifi- ers or the target's AC. ADVANTAGE/DISADVANTAGE Sometimes a D20 Test is modified by Advantage or Disadvantage. Advantage reflects the positive circumstances surrounding a d20 roll, while Disad- vantage reflects negative circumstances. You usually acquire Advantage or Disadvantage through the use of special abilities and actions. The DM can also decide that circumstances grant Ad- vantage or impose Disadvantage. ROLL Two D20s When a roll has either Advantage or Disadvantage, roll a second d20 when you make the roll. Use the higher of the two rolls if you have Advantage, and use the lower roll if you have Disadvantage. For example, if you have Disadvantage and roll an 18 and a 3, use the 3. If you instead have Advantage and roll those numbers, use the 18. THEY Don't Stack If multiple situations affect a roll and they all grant Advantage on it, you still roll only two d20s. Simi- larly, if multiple situations impose Disadvantage on aroll, you roll only two d20s. If circumstances cause a roll to have both Advan- tage and Disadvantage, the roll has neither of them, and you roll one d20. This is true even if multiple circumstances impose Disadvantage and only one grants Advantage or vice versa. In such a situation, you have neither Advantage nor Disadvantage. IF YOU WAVE ADVANTAGE, USE THE 18 IF You HAVE # Disadvantage, Use The 3 # Interactions With Rerolls When you have Advantage or Disadvantage and something in the game lets you reroll or replace the d20, you can reroll or replace only one die, not both. You choose which one. For example, if you have Heroic Inspiration (see the sidebar) and roll a 3 and an 18 on an ability check that has Advantage or Disadvantage, you could expend your Heroic Inspiration to reroll one of those dice, not both of them. a # Heroic Inspiration Sometimes the DM ora rule gives you Heroic Inspiration. If you have Heroic Inspiration, you can expend it to reroll any die immediately after rolling it, and you must use the new roll. Only One at a Time. You can never have more than one instance of Heroic Inspiration. If some- thing gives you Heroic Inspiration and you already have it, you can give it to a player character in your group who lacks it. Gaining Heroic Inspiration. Your DM can give you Heroic Inspiration for a variety of reasons. Typically, DMs award it when you do something particularly heroic, in character, or entertaining. It's a reward for making the game more fun for everyone playing. Other rules might allow your character to gain Heroic Inspiration independent of the DM's deci- sion. For example, Human characters start each day with Heroic Inspiration. PROFICIENCY Characters and monsters are good at various things. Some are skilled with many weapons, while others can use only a few. Some are better at understand- ing people's motives, and others are better at un- locking the secrets of the multiverse. All creatures have a Proficiency Bonus, which reflects the impact that training has on the creature's capabilities. A character's Proficiency Bonus increases as the character gains levels (described in chapter 2). A mon- ster's Proficiency Bonus is based on its Challenge Rating (see the rules glossary). The Proficiency Bo- nus table shows how the bonus is determined. This bonus is applied to a D20 Test when the crea- ture has proficiency in a skill, in a saving throw, or with an item that the creature uses to make the D20 Test. The bonus is also used for spell attacks and for calculating the DC of saving throws for spells. PrRoFiciENcy BONUS Level or CR Bonus Level or CR Bonus Up to 4 +2 17-20 +6 5-8 43 21-24 +7 9-12 +4 25-28 +8 13-16 +5 29-30 +9 THE Bonus DOESN'T STACK Your Proficiency Bonus can't be added to a die roll or another number more than once. For example, if arule allows you to make a Charisma (Deception or Persuasion) check, you add your Proficiency Bonus if you're proficient in either skill, but you don't add it twice if you're proficient in both skills. Occasionally, a Proficiency Bonus might be multi- plied or divided (doubled or halved, for example) be- fore being added. For example, the Expertise feature (see the rules glossary) doubles the Proficiency Bonus for certain ability checks. Whenever the bonus is used, it can be multiplied only once and divided only once. # Skill Proficiencies Most ability checks involve using a skill, which rep- resents a category of things creatures try to do with an ability check. The descriptions of the actions you take (see "Actions" later in this chapter) specify which skill applies if you make an ability check for that action, and many other rules note when a skill is relevant. The DM has the ultimate say on whether a skill is relevant in a situation. If a creature is proficient in a skill, the creature applies its Proficiency Bonus to ability checks in- volving that skill. Without proficiency in a skill, a creature can still make ability checks involving # CHAPTER \| PLAYING THE GAME # 13 Skills Skill Ability Example Uses Acrobatics Dexterity Animal Handling Wisdom Arcana Intelligence Athletics Strength Deception Charisma History Intelligence Insight Wisdom Intimidation Charisma Investigation Intelligence Medicine Wisdom Nature Intelligence Perception Wisdom Performance Charisma Persuasion Charisma Religion Intelligence Sleight of Hand \_ Dexterity Stealth Dexterity Survival Wisdom that skill but doesn't add its Proficiency Bonus. For example, if a character tries to climb a cliff, the DM might ask for a Strength (Athletics) check. If the character has Athletics proficiency, the character adds their Proficiency Bonus to the Strength check. If the character lacks that proficiency, they make the check without adding their Proficiency Bonus. SKILL List The skills are shown on the Skills table, which notes example uses for each skill proficiency as well as the ability check the skill most often applies to. # Determining Skills A character's starting skill proficiencies are deter- mined at character creation, and a monster's skill proficiencies appear in its stat block. ---\_ SKILLS WITH DIFFERENT ABILITIES Each skill proficiency is associated with an abil- ity check. For example, the Intimidation skill is associated with Charisma. In some situations, the DM might allow you to apply your skill profi- ciency to a different ability check. For example, if a character tries to intimidate someone through a show of physical strength, the DM might ask for a Strength (Intimidation) check rather than a Cha- risma (Intimidation) check. That character would make a Strength check and add their Proficiency Bonus if they have Intimidation proficiency. \~