# Produce A Magic Potion TasHa's BUBBLING CAULDRON Level 6 Conjuration (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 5 feet Component: V, S, M (a gilded ladle worth 500+ GP) Duration: 10 minutes You conjure a claw-footed cauldron filled with bub- bling liquid. The cauldron appears in an unoccupied space on the ground within 5 feet of you and lasts for the duration. The cauldron can't be moved and disappears when the spell ends, along with the bub- bling liquid inside it. The liquid in the cauldron duplicates the prop- erties of aCommon or an Uncommon potion of your choice (such as a Potion of Healing). As a Bonus Action, you or an ally can reach into the cauldron and withdraw one potion of that kind. The potion is contained in a vial that disappears when the potion is consumed. The cauldron can produce a number of these potions equal to your spellcasting ability modifier (minimum 1). When the last of these po- tions is withdrawn from the cauldron, the cauldron disappears, and the spell ends. Potions obtained from the cauldron that aren't consumed disappear when you cast this spell again, qasHa's Hipsous LAUGHTER Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: Vv, S, M (a tart and a feather) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute One creature of your choice that you can see within range makes a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, it has the Prone and Incapacitated conditions for the duration. During that time, it laughs uncontrollably if it's capable of laughter, and it can't end the Prone condition on itself. At the end of each of its turns and each time it takes damage, it makes another Wisdom saving throw. The target has Advantage on the save if the save is triggered by damage. On a successful save, the spell ends. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level about 1. TELEKINESIS Level 5 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, Ss Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You gain the ability to move or manipulate crea- tures or objects by thought. When you cast the spell and as a Magic action on your later turns before the spell ends, you can exert your will on one creature or object that you can see within range, causing the appropriate effect below. You can affect the same target round after round or choose a new one at any time. If you switch targets, the prior target is no longer affected by the spell. Creature. You can try to move a Huge or smaller creature. The target must succeed on a Strength saving throw, or you move it up to 30 feet in any direction within the spell's range. Until the end of your next turn, the creature has the Restrained con- dition, and if you lift it into the air, it is suspended there. It falls at the end of your next turn unless you use this option on it again and it fails the save. Object. You can try to move a Huge or smaller object. If the object isn't being worn or carried, you automatically move it up to 30 feet in any direction within the spell's range. If the object is worn or carried by a creature, that creature must succeed on a Strength saving throw, you pull the object away and move it up to 30. feet in any direction within the spell's range. can exert fine control on objects wi ic grip, such as manipulating a si a container, stowing or retrieving 'n Open container, or Pouring the con- vial, Components: V, S, M (a pair of linked silver ri Duration: 24 hours cot You create a telepathic link between yourself and a willing creature with which you are familiar. The Creature can be anywhere on the same plane of ex- istence as you. The spell ends if you or the target are no longer on the same plane. Until the spell ends, you and the target can in- stantly share words, images, sounds, and other Sensory messages with each other through the link, and the target recognizes you as the creature it is communicating with. The spell enables a creature to understand the meaning of your words and any sensory messages you send to it. TELEPORT Level 7 Conjuration (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 10 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous This spell instantly transports you and up to eight willing creatures that you can see within range, or a single object that you can see within range, to a des- tination you select. If you target an object, it must be Large or smaller, and it can't be held or carried by an unwilling creature. The destination you choose must be known to you, and it must be on the same plane of existence as you. Your familiarity with the destination deter- mines whether you arrive there successfully. The DM rolls 1d100 and consults the Teleportation Out- come table and the explanations after it. # Teleportation Outcome Similar Off On Familiarity Mishap Area Target Target Permanent circle = --- --- --- 01-00 Linked object - - --- 01-00 Very familiar 01-05 06-13 14-24 25-00 Seen casually O1-33 34-43 44-53 54-00 # 01-43 44-53 54-73 74-00 =a # 01-50 51-00 --- a.. ---- --- -\_- --- "= | | Familiarity. Here are the meanings of the terms in the table's Familiarity column: - "Permanent circle" means a permanent teleporta- tion circle whose sigil sequence you know. "Linked object" means you possess an object taken from the desired destination within the last six months, such as a book from a Wizard's library. - "Very familiar" is a place you have visited often, a place you have carefully studied, or a place you can see when you cast the spell. + "Seen casually" is a place you have seen more than once but with which you aren't very familiar. - "Viewed once or described" is a place you have seen once, possibly using magic, or a place you know through someone else's description, perhaps from a map. - "False destination" is a place that doesn't exist. Perhaps you tried to scry an enemy's sanctum but instead viewed an illusion, or you are attempting to teleport to a location that no longer exists. Mishap. The spell's unpredictable magic results in a difficult journey. Each teleporting creature (or the target object) takes 3d10 Force damage, and the DM rerolls on the table to see where you wind up (multiple mishaps can occur, dealing damage each time). Similar Area. You and your group (or the target object) appear in a different area that's visually or thematically similar to the target area. You appear in the closest similar place. If you are heading for your home laboratory, for example, you might ap- pear in another person's laboratory in the same city. Off Target. You and your group (or the target ob- ject) appear 2d12 miles away from the destination in a random direction. Roll 1d8 for the direction: 1, east; 2, southeast; 3, south; 4, southwest; 5, west; 6, northwest; 7, north; or 8, northeast. On Target. You and your group (or the target ob- ject) appear where you intended. TELEPORTATION CIRCLE Level 5 Conjuration (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 10 feet Components: V, M (rare inks worth 50+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: 1 round As you cast the spell, you draw a 5-foot-radius circle on the ground inscribed with sigils that link your location to a permanent teleportation circle of your choice whose sigil sequence you know and that is on the same plane of existence as you. A shimmer- ing portal opens within the circle you drew and remains open until the end of your next turn. Any creature that enters the portal instantly appears within 5 feet of the destination circle or in the near- est unoccupied space if that space is occupied. Many major temples, guildhalls, and other im- portant places have permanent teleportation cir- cles. Each circle includes a unique sigil sequence---a string of runes arranged in a particular pattern. When you first gain the ability to cast this spell, you learn the sigil sequences for two destinations on the Material Plane, determined by the DM. You might learn additional sigil sequences during your adventures. You can commit a new sigil sequence to memory after studying it for 1 minute. You can create a permanent teleportation circle by casting this spell in the same location every day for 365 days. TENSER'S FLOATING DIsk Level 1 Conjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a drop of mercury) Duration: 1 hour This spell creates a circular, horizontal plane of force, 3 feet in diameter and 1 inch thick, that floats 3 feet above the ground in an unoccupied space of your choice that you can see within range. The disk remains for the duration and can hold up to 500 pounds. If more weight is placed on it, the spell ends, and everything on the disk falls to the ground. The disk is immobile while you are within 20 feet of it. IF you move more than 20 feet away from it, the disk follows you so that it remains within 20 feet of you. It can move across uneven terrain, up or down stairs, slopes and the like, but it can't cross an elevation change of 10 feet or more. For exam- ple, the disk can't move across a 10-foot-deep pit, nor could it leave such a pit if it was created at the bottom. If you move more than 100 feet from the disk (typically because it can't move around an obstacle to follow you), the spell ends.! 5:! as aerate. aes) GO A Reo WizAar0 OF THAY ORDERS SKELETAL SERVANTS TO weap RICHES ON THE DISK OF TENSER'S FLOATING Disk. THAUMATURGY Transmutation Cantrip (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V Duration: Up to 1 minute You manifest a minor wonder within range. You create one of the effects below within range. If you cast this spell multiple times, you can have up to three of its 1-minute effects active at a time. Altered Eyes. You alter the appearance of your eyes for 1 minute. Booming Voice. Your voice booms up to three times as loud as normal for 1 minute. For the dura- tion, you have Advantage on Charisma (Intimidation) checks. Fire Play. You cause flames to flicker, brighten, dim, or change color for 1 minute. Invisible Hand. You instantaneously cause an un- locked door or window to fly open or slam shut. Phantom Sound. You create an instantaneous sound that originates from a point of your choice within range, such as a rumble of thunder, the cry of a raven, or ominous whispers. Tremors. You cause harmless tremors in the ground for 1 minute. THORN WHIP Transmutation Cantrip (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (the stem of a thorny plant) Duration: Instantaneous You create a vine-like whip covered in thorns that lashes out at your command toward a creature in range. Make a melee spell attack against the target. On a hit, the target takes 1d6 Piercing damage, and if it is Large or smaller, you can pull it up to 10 feet closer to you. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d6 when you reach levels 5 (2d6), 11 (3d6), and 17 (4d6). THUNDERCLAP Evocation Cantrip (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: S Duration: Instantaneous Each creature in a 5-foot Emanation originating from you must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or take 1d6 Thunder damage. The spell's thunderous sound can be heard up to 100 feet away. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d6 when you reach levels 5 (2d6), 11 (36), and 17 (4d6). # CHAPTER \| SPELLS 290:meE 294 # Thunderous Smite Level 1 Evocation (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a target with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: Instantaneous Your strike rings with thunder that is audible within 300 feet of you, and the target takes an ex- tra 2d6 Thunder damage from the attack. Addition- ally, if the target is a creature, it must succeed on a Strength saving throw or be pushed 10 feet away from you and have the Prone condition. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. THUNDERWAVE Level 1 Evocation (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You unleash a wave of thunderous energy. Each creature in a 15-foot Cube originating from you makes a Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 2d8 Thunder damage and is pushed 10 feet away from you. On a successful save, a crea- ture takes half as much damage only. In addition, unsecured objects that are entirely within the Cube are pushed 10 feet away from you, and a thunderous boom is audible within 300 feet. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 1. TiME STOP Level 9 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You briefly stop the flow of time for everyone but yourself. No time passes for other creatures, while you take 1d4 + 1 turns in a row, during which you can use actions and move as normal. This spell ends if one of the actions you use during this period, or any effects that you create during it, affects a creature other than you or an object be- ing worn or carried by someone other than you. In addition, the spell ends if you move to a place more than 1,000 feet from the location where you cast it. CHAPTER \| SPELLS TOLL THE DEAD Necromancy Cantrip (Cleric, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You point at one creature you can see within range, and the single chime of a dolorous bell is audible within 10 feet of the target. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or take 1d8 Necrotic damage. If the target is missing any of its Hit Points, it instead takes 1d12 Necrotic damage. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by one die when you reach levels 5 (2d8 or 2d12), 11 (3d8 or 3d12), and 17 (4d8 or 4d12). TONGUES Level 3 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, M (a miniature ziggurat) Duration: 1 hour This spell grants the creature you touch the ability to understand any spoken or signed language that it hears or sees. Moreover, when the target commu- nicates by speaking or signing, any creature that knows at least one language can understand it if that creature can hear the speech or see the signing. TRANSPORT VIA PLANTS Level 6 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 10 feet Components: V, S Duration: 1 minute This spell creates a magical link between a Large or larger inanimate plant within range and another plant, at any distance, on the same plane of exis- tence. You must have seen or tuuched the destina- tion plant at least once before. Fur the duration, any creature can step into the tar=\> plant and exit from the destination plant by usi#s;; \| "ect of movement. TaansPorT VIA PLANTS ANO TREE STRIDE TURN TREES INTO A TRANSPORTATION NETWORK # Tree Stride Level 5 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You gain the ability to enter a tree and move from inside it to inside another tree of the same kind within 500 feet. Both trees must be living and at least the same size as you. You must use 5 feet of movement to enter a tree. You instantly know the location of all other trees of the same kind within 500 feet and, as part of the move used to enter the tree, can either pass into one of those trees or step out of the tree you're in. You appear in a spot of your choice within 5 feet of the destination tree, using another 5 feet of movement. If you have no movement left, you appear within 5 feet of the tree you entered. You can use this transportation ability only once on each of your turns. You must end each turn out- side a tree. TRUE POLYMORPH Level 9 Transmutation (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a drop of mercury, a dollop of gum arabic, and a wisp of smoke) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour Choose one creature or nonmagical object that you can see within range. The creature shape-shifts into a different creature or a nonmagical object, or the objeci: shape-shifts into a creature (the object must be neither worn nor carried). The transformation lasts for the duration or until the target dies or is destroyed, but if you maintain Concentration on this spell for the full duration, the spell lasts until dispelled. An unwilling creature can make a Wisdom sav- ing throw, and if it succeeds, it isn't affected by this spell. Creature into Creature. If you turn a creature into another kind of creature, the new form can be any kind you choose that has a Challenge Rating equal to or less than the target's Challenge Rating or level. The target's game statistics are replaced by the stat block of the new form, but it retains its Hit Points, Hit Point Dice, alignment, and personality. The target gains a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to the Hit Points of the new form. The spell ends early on the target if it has no Temporary Hit Points left. The target is limited in the actions it can perform by the anatomy of its new form, and it can't speak or cast spells. The target's gear melds into the new form. The creature can't use or otherwise benefit from any of that equipment. Object into Creature. You can turn an object into any kind of creature, as long as the creature's size is no larger than the object's size and the creature has a Challenge Rating of 9 or lower. The creature is Friendly to you and your allies. In combat, it takes its turns immediately after yours, and it obeys your commands, If the spell lasts more than an hour, you no longer control the creature. It might remain Friendly to you, depending on how you have treated it. Creature into Object. If you turn a creature into an object, it transforms along with whatever it is wear- ing and carrying into that form, as long as the ob- ject's size is no larger than the creature's size. The creature's statistics become those of the object, and the creature has no memory of time spent in this form after the spell ends and it returns to normal. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS TRUE RESURRECTION Level 9 Necromancy (Cleric, Druid) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (diamonds worth 25,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You touch a creature that has been dead for no longer than 200 years and that died for any reason except old age. The creature is revived with all its Hit Points. This spell closes all wounds, neutralizes any poison, cures all magical contagions, and lifts any curses affecting the creature when it died. The spell replaces damaged or missing organs and limbs. If the creature was Undead, it is restored to its non-Undead form. The spell can provide a new body if the original no longer exists, in which case you must speak the creature's name. The creature then appears in an unoccupied space you choose within 10 feet of you. # True Seeing Level 6 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (mushroom powder worth 25+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: 1 hour For the duration, the willing creature you touch has Truesight with a range of 120 feet. TRUE STRIKE Divination Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: S, M (a weapon with which you have proficiency and that is worth 1+ CP) Duration: Instantaneous Guided by a flash of magical insight, you make one attack with the weapon used in the spell's casting. The attack uses your spellcasting ability for the at- tack and damage rolls instead of using Strength or Dexterity. If the attack deals damage, it can be Ra- diant damage or the weapon's normal damage type (your choice). Cantrip Upgrade. Whether you deal Radiant dam- age or the weapon's normal damage type, the attack deals extra Radiant damage when you reach levels 5 (1d6), 11 (2d6), and 17 (3d6).. TSUNAMI Level 8 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 1 mile Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 6 rounds A wall of water springs into existence at a point you choose within range. You can make the wall up to 300 feet long, 300 feet high, and 50 feet thick. The wall lasts for the duration. When the wall appears, each creature in its area makes a Strength saving throw, taking 6d10 Blud- geoning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. At the start of each of your turns after the wall appears, the wall, along with any creatures in it, moves 50 feet away from you. Any Huge or smaller creature inside the wall or whose space the wall enters when it moves must succeed ona Strength saving throw or take 5d10 Bludgeoning damage. A creature can take this damage only once per round. At the end of the turn, the wall's height is reduced by 50 feet, and the damage the wall deals on later rounds is reduced by 1d10. When the wall reaches 0 feet in height, the spell ends. A creature caught in the wall can move by swim- ming. Because of the wave's force, though, the crea- ture must succeed on a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC to move at all. If it fails the check, it can't move. A creature that moves out of the wall falls to the ground. UNSEEN SERVANT Level 1 Conjuration (Bard, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of string and of wood) Duration: 1 hour This spell creates an Invisible, mindless, shapeless, Medium force that performs simple tasks at your command until the spell ends. The servant springs into existence in an unoccupied space on the ground within range. It has AC 10, 1 Hit Point, anda Strength of 2, and it can't attack. If it drops to O Hit Points, the spell ends. Once on each of your turns as a Bonus Action, you can mentally command the servant to move up to 15 feet and interact with an object. The servant can perform simple tasks that 2 human could do, such as fetching things, cleaning, mending, folding clothes, lighting fires, serving food, and pouring ne A GNomeE Baro casts Vicious Mockery To SKEWER A KOBOLD WITH MAGICAL INSULTS. drinks. Once you give the command, the servant performs the task to the best of its ability until it completes the task, then waits for your next command. If you command the servant to perform a task that would move it more than 60 feet away from you, the spell ends. VAMPIRIC TOUCH Level 3 Necromancy (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute The touch of your shadow-wreathed hand can si- phon life force from others to heal your wounds. Make a melee spell attack against one creature within reach. On a hit, the target takes 3d6 Necrotic damage, and you regain Hit Points equal to half the amount of Necrotic damage dealt. Until the spell ends, you can make the attack again on each of your turns as a Magic action, tar- geting the same creature or a different one, Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 3. a Vicious MocKERY Enchantment Cantrip (Bard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You unleash a string of insults laced with subtle enchantments at one creature you can see or hear within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or take 1d6 Psychic damage and have Disadvantage on the next attack roll it makes before the end of its next turn. Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d6 when you reach levels 5 (2d6), 11 (3d6), and 17 (4d6). VITRIOLIC SPHERE Level 4 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a drop of bile) Duration: Instantaneous You point at a location within range, and a glow- ing, 1-foot-diameter ball of acid streaks there and 338 # A Tiefling Sorcerer Unleashes VirrioLic SPHERE ON NOTHICS. explodes in a 20-foot-radius Sphere. Each creature in that area makes a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, a creature takes 10d4 Acid damage and another 5d4 Acid damage at the end of its next turn. On a successful save, a creature takes half the initial damage only. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The initial damage increases by 2d4 for each spell slot level above 4. WALL OF FIRE Level 4 Evocation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a piece of charcoal) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a wall of fire on a solid surface within range. You can make the wall up to 60 feet long, 20 feet high, and 1 foot thick, or a ringed wall up to 20 feet in diameter, 20 feet high, and 1 foot thick. The wall is opaque and lasts for the duration. When the wall appears, each creature in its area makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d8 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. One side of the wall, selected by you when you cast this spell, deals 5d8 Fire damage to each crea- ture that ends its turn within 10 feet of that side or inside the wall. A creature takes the same damage when it enters the wall for the first time on a turn # CHAPTER \| SPELLS or ends its turn there. The other side of the wall deals no damage. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 4. WALL OF FORCE Level 5 Evocation (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a shard of glass) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes An Invisible wall of force springs into existence at a point you choose within range. The wall appears in any orientation you choose, as a horizontal or vertical barrier or at an angle. It can be free floating or resting on a solid surface. You can form it into a hemispherical dome or a globe with a radius of up to 10 feet, or you can shape a flat surface made up of ten 10-foot-by-10-foot panels. Each panel must be contiguous with another panel. In any form, the wall is 1/4 inch thick and lasts for the duration. If the wall cuts through a creature's space when it ap- pears, the creature is pushed te one side of the wall (you choose which side). Nothing can physically pass through the wall. It is immune to all damage and can't be dispelled by Dispel Magic. A Disintegrate estroys the wall instantly, however. The wall « tends into the Ethereal Plane and blocks et ravel through the wall. # Wall Of Ice Level 6 Evocation (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a piece of quartz) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create a wall of ice on a solid surface within range. You can form it into a hemispherical dome ora globe with a radius of up to 10 feet, or you can shape a flat surface made up of ten 10-foot-square panels. Each panel must be contiguous with another panel. In any form, the wall is 1 foot thick and lasts | for the duration. ' If the wall cuts through a creature's space when it appears, the creature is pushed to one side of the wall (you choose which side) and makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 10d6 Cold damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. The wall is an object that can be damaged and thus breached. It has AC 12 and 30 Hit Points per 10-foot section, and it has Immunity to Cold, Poi- son, and Psychic damage and Vulnerability to Fire damage. Reducing a 10-foot section of wall to 0 Hit Points destroys it and leaves behind a sheet of frigid air in the space the wall occupied. A creature moving through the sheet of frigid air for the first time on a turn makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 5d6 Cold damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. } Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage the wall deals when it appears increases by 2d6 and the damage from passing through the sheet of frigid air increases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 6. WALL OF STONE Level 5 Evocation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a cube of granite) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes A nonmagical wall of solid stone springs into exis- tence at a point you choose within range. The wall is 6 inches thick and is composed of ten 10-foot-by- 10-foot panels. Each panel must be contiguous with another panel. Alternatively, you can create 10-foot- by-20-foot panels that are only 3 inches thick. If the wall cuts through a creature's space when it appears, the creature is pushed to one side of the wall (you choose which side). If a creature would be surrounded on all sides by the wall (or the wall and another solid surface), that creature can make a Dexterity saving throw. Ona success, it can use its Reaction to move up to its Speed so that it is no longer enclosed by the wall. The wall can have any shape you desire, though it can't occupy the same space as a creature or object. The wall doesn't need to be vertical or rest ona firm foundation. It must, however, merge with and be solidly supported by existing stone. Thus, you can use this spell to bridge a chasm or create a ramp. If you create a span greater than 20 feet in length you must halve the size of each panel to create sup- ports. You can crudely shape the wall to create bat- tlements and the like. The wall is an object made of stone that can be damaged and thus breached. Each panel has AC 15 and 30 Hit Points per inch of thickness, and it has Immunity to Poison and Psychic damage. Reducing a panel to O Hit Points destroys it and might cause connected panels to collapse at the DM's discretion. If you maintain your Concentration on this spell for its full duration, the wall becomes permanent and can't be dispelled. Otherwise, the wall disap- pears when the spell ends. WALL OF THORNS Level 6 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a handful of thorns) Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create a wall of tangled brush bristling with needle-sharp thorns. The wall appears within range ona solid surface and lasts for the duration. You choose to make the wall up to 60 feet long, 10 feet high, and 5 feet thick or a circle that has a 20-foot diameter and is up to 20 feet high and S feet thick. The wall blocks line of sight. When the wall appears, each creature in its area makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 748 Pierc- ing damage on a failed save or half as much damage ona successful one. A creature can move through the wall, albeit slowly and painfully. For every 1 foot a creature moves through the wall, it must spend 4 feet of movement. Furthermore, the first time a creature enters a space in the wall on a turn or ends its turn there, the creature makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 7d8 Slashing damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature makes this save only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. Both types of dam- age increase by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 6. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS # Warding Bond Level 2 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a pair of platinum rings worth 50+ GP each, which you and the target must wear for the duration) Duration: 1 hour You touch another creature that is willing and create a mystic connection between you and the target until the spell ends. While the target is within 60 feet of you, it gains a +1 bonus to AC and saving throws, and it has Resistance to all damage. Also, each time it takes damage, you take the same amount of damage. The spell ends if you drop to O Hit Points or if you and the target become separated by more than 60 feet. It also ends if the spell is cast again on either of the connected creatures. WATER BREATHING Level 3 Transmutation (Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a short reed) Duration: 24 hours This spell grants up to ten willing creatures of your choice within range the ability to breathe under- water until the spell ends. Affected creatures also retain their normal mode of respiration. WATER WALK Level 3 Transmutation (Cleric, Druid, Ranger, Sorcerer) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a piece of cork) Duration: 1 hour This spell grants the ability to move across any liq- uid surface---such as water, acid, mud, snow, quick- sand, or lava---as if it were harmless solid ground {i (creatures crossing molten lava can still take dam- i age from the heat). Up to ten willing creatures of your choice within range gain this ability for the duration. An affected target must take a Bonus Action to pass from the liquid's surface into the liquid itself and vice versa, but if the target falls into the liquid, the target passes through the surface into the liquid below. \_ te CHAPT. \% \ hk, a Sreits vike WarerR BREATHING AND WareR WALK ASSIST VISITS TO AQUATIC REALMS. WEB Level 2 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of spiderweb) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You conjure a mass of sticky webbing at a point within range. The webs fill a 20-foot Cube there for the duration. The webs are Difficult Terrain, and the area within them is Lightly Obscured. If the webs aren't anchored between two solid masses (such as walls or trees) or layered across a floor, wall, or ceiling, the web collapses on itself, and the spell ends at the start of your next turn. Webs layered over a flat surface have a depth of 5 feet. The first time a creature enters the webs on a turn or starts its turn there, it must succeed on a Dexter- ity saving throw or have the Restrained condition while in the webs or until it breaks free. A creature Restrained by the webs can take an action to make a Strength (Athletics) check against your spell save DC. If it succeeds, it is no longer Restrained. The webs are flammable. Any 5-foot Cube of webs exposed to fire burns away in } round, dealing 2d4 Fire damage to any creature that starts its turn in the fire. # Andrew Mar Weird Level 9 Illusion (Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You try to create illusory terrors in others' minds. Each creature of your choice in a 30-foot-radius Sphere centered on a point within range makes a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, a target takes 10d10 Psychic damage and has the Frightened condition for the duration. On a successful save, a target takes half as much damage only. A Frightened target makes a Wisdom saving throw at the end of each of its turns. On a failed save, it takes 5d10 Psychic damage. On a successful save, the spell ends on that target. # Wind Walk Level 6 Transmutation (Druid) Casting Time: 1 minute Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a candle) Duration: 8 hours You and up to ten willing creatures of your choice within range assume gaseous forms for the du- ration, appearing as wisps of cloud. While in this cloud form, a target has a Fly Speed of 300 feet and can hover; it has Immunity to the Prone condition; and it has Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage. The only actions a target can take in this form are the Dash action or a Magic action to begin reverting to its normal form. Reverting takes 1 minute, during which the target has the Stunned condition. Until the spell ends, the target can revert to cloud form, which also requires a Magic action followed by a 1-minute transformation. If a target is in cloud form and flying when the ef- fect ends, the target descends 60 feet per round for 1 minute until it lands, which it does safely. If it can't land after 1 minute, it falls the remaining distance. WIND WALL Level 3 Evocation (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (a fan and a feather) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A wall of strong wind rises from the ground at a point you choose within range. You can make the wall up to 50 feet long, 15 feet high, and 1 foot thick. You can shape the wall in any way you choose so long as it makes one continuous path along the ground. The wall lasts for the duration. When the wall appears, each creature in its area makes a Strength saving throw, taking 4d8 Blud- geoning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. The strong wind keeps fog, smoke, and other gases at bay. Small or smaller flying creatures or objects can't pass through the wall. Loose, light- weight materials brought into the wall fly upward. Arrows, bolts, and other ordinary projectiles launched at targets behind the wall are deflected upward and miss automatically. Boulders hurled by Giants or siege engines, and similar projectiles, are unaffected. Creatures in gaseous form can't pass through it. WISH Level 9 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Instantaneous Wish is the mightiest spell a mortal can cast. By sim- ply speaking aloud, you can alter reality itself. The basic use of this spell is to duplicate any other spell of level 8 or lower. If you use it this way, you don't need to meet any requirements to cast that spell, including costly components. The spell simply takes effect. Alternatively, you can create one of the following effects of your choice: Object Creation. You create one object of up to 25,000 GP in value that isn't a magic item. The object can be no more than 300 feet in any dimension, and it appears in an unoccupied space that you can see on the ground. Instant Health. You allow yourself and up to twenty creatures that you can see to regain all Hit Points, and you end all effects on them listed in the Greater Restoration spell. Resistance. You grant up to ten creatures that you can see Resistance to one damage type that you choose. This Resistance is permanent. Spell Immunity. You grant up to ten creatures you can see immunity to a single spell or other magi- cal effect for 8 hours. Sudden Learning. You replace one of your feats with another feat for which you are eligible. You lose all the benefits of the old feat and gain the benefits of the new one. You can't replace a feat that is a prerequisite for any of your other feats or features. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS OAT A HALFLING WARLOCK ZAP5 A ZOMBIE WITH THE GRASPING LIGHTNING OF Wircw Boxr. Roll Redo. You undo a single recent event by forc- ing a reroll of any die roll made within the last round (including your last turn). Reality reshapes itself to accommodate the new result. For exam- ple, a Wish spell could undo an ally's failed saving throw or a foe's Critical Hit. You can force the re- roll to be made with Advantage or Disadvantage, and you choose whether to use the reroll or the original roll. Reshape Reality. You may wish for something not included in any of the other effects. To do so, state your wish to the DM as precisely as possible. The DM has great latitude in ruling what occurs in such an instance; the greater the wish, the greater the likelihood that something goes wrong. This spell might simply fail, the effect you desire might be achieved only in part, or you might suffer an unforeseen consequence as a result of how you worded the wish. For example, wishing that a villain were dead might propel you forward in time to a period when that villain is no longer alive, effectively removing you from the game. Similarly, wishing for a Legendary magic item or an Artifact might instantly transport you to the QCHAPTER \| SPELLS presence of the item's current owner. If your wish is granted and its effects have consequences for a whole community, region, or world, you are likely to attract powerful foes. If your wish would affect a god, the god's divine servants might instantly in- tervene to prevent it or to encourage you to craft the wish in a particular way. If your wish would undo the multiverse itself, threaten the City of Sigil, or affect the Lady of Pain in any way, you see an image of her in your mind for a moment; she shakes her head, and your wish fails. The stress of casting Wish to produce any effect other than duplicating another spell weakens you. After enduring that stress, each time you cast a spell until you finish a Long Rest, you take 1d10 Necrotic damage per level of that spell. This damage can't be reduced or prevented in any way. In addition, your Strength score becomes 3 for 2d4 days. For each of those days that you spend resting and doing nothing more than light activity, your remaining recovery time decreases by 2 days. Finally, there is a 33 per- cent chance that you are unable to cast Wish ever again if you suffer this stress. WwitcH BOLT Level 1 Evocation (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a twig struck by lightning) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute A beam of crackling energy lances toward a crea- ture within range, forming a sustained arc of light- ning between you and the target. Make a ranged spell attack against it. On a hit, the target takes 2d12 Lightning damage. On each of your subsequent turns, you can take a Bonus Action to deal 1d12 Lightning damage to the target automatically, even if the first attack missed. The spell ends if the target is ever outside the spell's range or if it has Total Cover from you. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The initial damage increases by 1d12 for each spell slot level above 1.