# Antilife Shell Level 5 Abjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour An aura extends from you in a 10-foot Emanation for the duration. The aura prevents creatures other than Constructs and Undead from passing or reach- ing through it. An affected creature can cast spells or make attacks with Ranged or Reach weapons through the barrier. If you move so that an affected creature is forced to pass through the barrier, the spell ends. # Antimagic Field Level 8 Abjuration (Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (iron filings) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour An aura of antimagic surrounds you in 10-foot Em- anation. No one can cast spells, take Magic actions, or create other magical effects inside the aura, and those things can't target or otherwise affect any- thing inside it. Magical properties of magic items don't work inside the aura or on anything inside it. Areas of effect created by spells or other magic can't extend into the aura, and no one can teleport into or out of it or use planar travel there. Portals close temporarily while in the aura. Ongoing spells, except those cast by an Artifact or a deity, are suppressed in the area. While an effect is suppressed, it doesn't function, but the time it spends suppressed counts against its duration. Dispel Magic has no effect on the aura, and the au- ras created by different Antimagic Field spells don't nullify each other. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS ANTIPATHY/SYMPATHY E Level 8 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a mix of vinegar and honey) Duration: 10 days As you cast the spell, choose whether it creates an- tipathy or sympathy, and target one creature or ob- ject that is Huge or smaller. Then specify a kind of creature, such as red dragons, goblins, or vampires. A creature of the chosen kind makes a Wisdom saving throw when it comes within 120 feet of the target. Your choice of antipathy or sympathy deter- mines what happens to a creature when it fails that save: Antipathy. The creature has the Frightened condi- tion. The Frightened creature must use its move- ment on its turns to get as far away as possible from the target, moving by the safest route. Sympathy. The creature has the Charmed condi- tion. The Charmed creature must use its move- ment on its turns to get as close as possible to the target, moving by the safest route. If the creature is within 5 feet of the target, the creature can't willingly move away. If the target damages the Charmed creature, that creature can make a Wis- dom saving throw to end the effect, as described below. Ending the Effect. If the Frightened or Charmed creature ends its turn more than 120 feet away from the target, the creature makes a Wisdom sav- ing throw. Ona successful save, the creature is no longer affected by the target. A creature that suc- cessfully saves against this effect is immune to it for 1 minute, after which it can be affected again. ARCANE EYE Level 4 Divination (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a bit of bat fur) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You create an Invisible, invulnerable eye within range that hovers for the duration. You mentally receive visual information from the eye, which can see in every direction. It also has Darkvision with a range of 30 feet. As a Bonus Action, you can move the eye up to 30 feet in any direction. A solid barrier blocks the eye's movement, but the eye can pass through an opening as small as 1 inch in diameter.: 'CHAPTER \| SPELLS ARCANE GATE Level 6 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 500 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create linked teleportation portals. Choose two Large, unoccupied spaces on the ground that you can see, one space within range and the other one within 10 feet of you. A circular portal opens in each of those spaces and remains for the duration, The portals are two-dimensional glowing rings filled with mist that blocks sight. They hover inches from the ground and are perpendicular to it. A portal is open on only one side (you choose which). Anything entering the open side of a portal exits from the open side of the other portal as if the two were adjacent to each other. As a Bonus Action, you can change the facing of the open sides. ARCANE Lock Level 2 Abjuration (Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (gold dust worth 25+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled You touch a closed door, window, gate, container, or hatch and magically lock it for the duration. This lock can't be unlocked by any nonmagical means. You and any creatures you designate when you cast the spell can open and close the object despite the lock. You can also set a password that, when spoken within 5 feet of the object, unlocks it for 1 minute. ARCANE VIGOR Level 2 Abjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Component: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You tap into your life force to heal yourself. Roll one or two of your unexpended Hit Point Dice, and re- gain a number of Hit Points equal to the roll's total plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Those dice are then expended. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. 'he number of un- expended Hit Dice you can reli increases by one for each spell slot level above 2. A GOLIATH WARLOCK CALLS ON ARMOR OF AGATHYS ANO ARMS OF HaDAR TO BATTLE ARMOR OF AGATHYS Level 1 Abjuration (Warlock) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a shard of blue glass) Duration: 1 hour Protective magical frost surrounds you. You gain 5 Temporary Hit Points. If a creature hits you with a melee attack roll before the spell ends, the creature takes 5 Cold damage. The spell ends early if you have no Temporary Hit Points. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Temporary Hit Points and the Cold damage both increase by 5 for each spell slot level above 1. ARMS OF HADAR Level 1 Conjuration (Warlock) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous Invoking Hadar, you cause tendrils to erupt from yourself. Eacls creature in a 10-foot Emanation orig- inating from vou makes a Strength saving throw. Ona failed save, a target takes 2d6 Necrotic damage and can't take Reactions until the start of its next turn. Ona successful save, a target takes half as much damage only. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. ASTRAL PROJECTION Level 9 Necromancy (Cleric, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: 10 feet Components: V, S, M (for each of the spell's targets, one jacinth worth 1,000+ GP and one silver bar worth 100+ GP, all of which the spell consumes) Duration: Until dispelled You and up to eight willing creatures within range project your astral bodies into the Astral Plane (the spell ends instantly if you are already on that plane). Each target's body is left behind in a state of sus- pended animation; it has the Unconscious condition, doesn't need food or air, and doesn't age. A target's astral form resembles its body in almost every way, replicating its game statistics and pos- sessions. The principal difference is the addition of a silvery cord that trails from between the shoulder blades of the astral form. The cord fades from view after 1 foot. If the cord is cut---which happens only when an effect states that it does so---the target's ' body and astral form both die. ait " ' A target's astral form can travel through the As- tral Plane. The moment an astral form leaves that plane, the target's body and possessions travel along the silver cord, causing the target to re-enter its body on the new plane. Any damage or other effects that apply to an as- tral form have no effect on the target's body and vice versa. If a target's body or astral form drops to 0 Hit Points, the spell ends for that target. The spell ends for all the targets if you take a Magic action to dismiss it. When the spell ends for a target who isn't dead, the target reappears in its body and exits the state of suspended animation. AUGURY Level 2 Divination (Cleric, Druid, Wizard) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (specially marked sticks, bones, cards, or other divinatory tokens worth 25+ GP) Duration: Instantaneous You receive an omen from an otherworldly entity about the results of a course of action that you plan to take within the next 30 minutes. The DM chooses the omen from the Omens table. OMENS Omen For Results That Will Be... Weal Good Woe Bad Weal and woe Good and bad Indifference Neither good nor bad The spell doesn't account for circumstances, such as other spells, that might change the results. If you cast the spell more than once before finish- ing a Long Rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent chance for each casting after the first that you get no answer. # Aura Of Life Level 4 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes An aura radiates from you in a 30-foot Emanation for the duration. While in the aura, you and your allies have Resistance to Necrotic damage, and your Hit Point maximums can't be reduced. If an ally with O Hit Points starts its turn in the aura, that ally regains 1 Hit Point. = # Aura Of Purity Level 4 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes An aura radiates from you in a 30-foot Emanation for the duration. While in the aura, you and your allies have Resistance to Poison damage and Advan- tage on saving throws to avoid or end effects that include the Blinded, Charmed, Deafened, Fright- ened, Paralyzed, Poisoned, or Stunned condition. AURA OF VITALITY Level 3 Abjuration (Cleric, Druid, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute An aura radiates from you in a 30-foot Emanation for the duration. When you create the aura and at the start of each of your turns while it persists, you can restore 2d6 Hit Points to one creature in it. AWAKEN Level 5 Transmutation (Bard, Druid) Casting Time: 8 hours Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (an agate worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes) Duration: Instantaneous You spend the casting time tracing magical path- ways within a precious gemstone, and then touch the target. The target must be either a Beast or Plant creature with an Intelligence of 3 or less ora natural plant that isn't a creature. The target gains an Intelligence of 10 and the ability to speak one language you know. If the target is a natural plant, it becomes a Plant creature and gains the ability to move its limbs, roots, vines, creepers, and so forth, and it gains senses similar to a human's. The DM chooses statistics appropriate for the awak- ened Plant, such as the statistics for the Awakened Shrub or Awakened Tree in the Monster Manual. The awakened target has the Charmed condition for 30 days or until you or your allies deal damage to it. When that condition ends, the awakened crea- ture chooses its attitude toward you. BANE Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric, Warlock) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a drop of blood) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Up to three creatures of your choice that you can see within range must each make a Charisma saving throw. Whenever a target that fails this save makes an attack roll or a saving throw before the spell ends, the target must subtract 1d4 from the attack roll or save. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. # Banishing Smite Level 5 Conjuration (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- ately after hitting a creature with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute The target hit by the attack roll takes an extra 5d10 Force damage from the attack. If the attack reduces the target to SO Hit Points or fewer, the target must succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be trans- ported to a harmless demiplane for the duration. While there, the target has the Incapacitated con- dition. When the spell ends, the target reappears in the space it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that space is occupied. BANISHMENT Level 4 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a pentacle) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute One creature that you can see within range must succeed on a Charisma saving throw or be trans- ported to a harmless demiplane for the duration. While there, the target has the Incapacitated con- dition. When the spell ends, the target reappears in the space it left or in the nearest unoccupied space if that space is occupied. If the target is an Aberration, a Celestial, an Ele- mental, a Fey, or a Fiend, the target doesn't return if the spell lasts for 1 minute. The target is instead t orted to a random location on a plane (DM's dl associated with its creature type. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 4. # --------- Barkskin Level 2 Transmutation (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: Touch Component: V, S, M (a handful of bark) Duration: 1 hour You touch a willing creature. Until the spell ends, the target's skin assumes a bark-like appearance, and the target has an Armor Class of 17 if its AC is lower than that. BEACON OF Hope Level 3 Abjuration (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Choose any number of creatures within range. For the duration, each target has Advantage on Wis- dom saving throws and Death Saving Throws and regains the maximum number of Hit Points possible from any healing. # Beast Sense Level 2 Divination (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Touch Components: S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 hour You touch a willing Beast. For the duration, you can perceive through the Beast's senses as well as your own. When perceiving through the Beasts senses, you benefit from any special senses it has. BEFUDDLEMENT Level 8 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (a key ring with no keys) Duration: Instantaneous You blast the mind of a creature that you can see within range. The target makes an Intelligence sav- ing throw. TER 7 \| SPELLS THe Wizard BicBy USES HIS SIGNATURE SPELL, Bicsy's HaNno, TO PREVENT INTERRUPTIONS TO HIS RESEARCH. y j 2 Ona failed save, the target takes 10d12 Psychic damage and can't cast spells or take the Magic ac- tion. At the end of every 30 days, the target repeats the save, ending the effect on a success. The effect can also be ended by the Greater Restoration, Heal, or Wish spell. Ona successful save, the target takes half as much damage only. BESTOW CURSE Level 3 Necromancy (Bard, Cleric, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You touch a creature, which must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or become cursed for the du- ration. Until the curse ends, the target suffers one of the following effects of your choice: - Choose one ability. The target has Disadvantage on ability checks and saving throws made with that ability.: The target has Disadvantage on attack rolls against you. HAPTER 7 \| SPELLS - In combat, the target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw at the start of each of its turns or be forced to take the Dodge action on that turn. - If you deal damage to the target with an attack roll or a spell, the target takes an extra 1d8 Ne- crotic damage. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. If you cast this spell using a level 4 spell slot, you can maintain Concentration on it for up to 10 minutes. If you use a level 5+ spell slot, the spell doesn't require Concentration, and the duration becomes 8 hours (level 5-6 slot) or 24 hours (level 7-8 slot). If you use a level 9 spell slot, the spell Jasts until dispelled. BicBy's HAND Level 5 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S, M (an eggshell and a glove) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You create a Large hand of shiminering magical en- ergy in an unoccupied space that you can see within range. The hand lasts for the duration, and it moves at your command, mimicking the s:ovements of your own hand. The hana ++ an object that has AC 20 and Hit Points equa! to your Hit Point maximum. If it drops to 0 Hit Points, the spell ends. The hand doesn't oc- cupy its space. When you cast the spell and as a Bonus Action on your later turns, you can move the hand up to 60 feet and then cause one of the following effects: Clenched Fist. The hand strikes a target within 5 feet of it. Make a melee spell attack. On a hit, the target takes 5d8 Force damage. Forceful Hand. The hand attempts to push a Huge or smaller creature within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a Strength saving throw, or the hand pushes the target up to 5 feet plus a number of feet equal to five times your spellcasting ability modifier. The hand moves with the target, remain- ing within 5 feet of it. Grasping Hand. The hand attempts to grapple a Huge or smaller creature within 5 feet of it. The target must succeed on a Dexterity saving throw, or the target has the Grappled condition, with an escape DC equal to your spell save DC. While the hand grapples the target, you can take a Bonus Action to cause the hand to crush it, dealing Blud- geoning damage to the target equal to 4d6 plus your spellcasting ability modifier. Interposing Hand. The hand grants you Half Cover against attacks and other effects that originate from its space or that pass through it. In addi- tion, its space counts as Difficult Terrain for your enemies. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage of the Clenched Fist increases by 2d8 and the damage of the Grasping Hand increases by 2d6 for each spell slot level above 5. BLADE BARRIER Level 6 Evocation (Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create a wall of whirling blades made of magi- cal energy. The wall appears within range and lasts for the duration. You make a straight wall up to 100 feet long, 20 feet high, and 5 feet thick, or a ringed wall up to 60 feet in diameter, 20 feet high, and 5 feet thick. The wall provides Three-Quarters Cover, and its space is Difficult Terrain. Any creature in the wall's space makes a Dexterity saving throw. taking 6d10 Force damage on a failed save or hall' ss sauch damage on a successful one. A creature alse makes that save if it enters 'space or end ii turn there. A creature m: ---\_---. # Blade Ward Abjuration Cantrip (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Whenever a creature makes an attack roll against you before the spell ends, the attacker subtracts 1d4 from the attack roll. BLESS Level 1 Enchantment (Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S, M (a Holy Symbol worth 5+ GP) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You bless up to three creatures within range. Whenever a target makes an attack roll or a saving throw before the spell ends, the target adds 1d4 to the attack roll or save. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. BLIGHT Level 4 Necromancy (Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A creature that you can see within range makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 8d8 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A Plant creature automatically fails the save. Alternatively, target a nonmagical plant that isn't a creature, such as a tree or shrub. It doesn't make a '+ save; it simply withers and dies. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 4. af \| a --- --- \<a # Blinding Smite Level 3 Evocation (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action, which you take immedi- Pre ately after hitting a creature with a Melee weapon or an Unarmed Strike Range: Self Component: V ratio: 1 minute --- Pat ia Nt incda tae a nd the targ ------------------------------\< ltt Blinded condition until the spell ends. At the end of each of its turns, the Blinded target makes a Consti- tution saving throw, ending the spell on itself on a success. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The extra damage increases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 3. BLINDNESS/DEAFNESS; Level 2 Transmutation (Bard, Cleric, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet | Components: V | Duration: 1 minute One creature that you can see within range must succeed on a Constitution saving throw, or it has the Blinded or Deafened condition (your choice) for the duration. At the end of each of its turns, the target repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 2. BLINK Level 3 Transmutation (Sorcerer, Wizard) | Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: 1 minute Roll 1d6 at the end of each of your turns for the du- ration. On a roll of 4-6, you vanish from your cur- rent plane of existence and appear in the Ethereal Plane (the spell ends instantly if you are already on that plane). While on the Ethereal Plane, you can perceive the plane you left, which is cast in shades of gray, but you can't see anything there more than 60 feet away. You can affect and be affected only by other creatures on the Ethereal Plane, and crea- tures on the other plane can't perceive you unless they have a special ability that lets them perceive things on the Ethereal Plane. You return to the other plane at the start of your next turn and when the spell ends if you are on the Ethereal Plane. You return to an unoccupied space of your choice that you can see within 10 feet of the space you left. If no unoccupied space is available within that range, you appear in the nearest unoc- cupied space. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS BLUR Level 2 Illusion (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Your body becomes blurred. For the duration, any creature has Disadvantage on attack rolls against you. An attacker is immune to this effect if it per- ceives you with Blindsight or Truesight. BURNING HANDS Level 1 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous A thin sheet of flames shoots forth from you. Each creature in a 15-foot Cone makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 3d6 Fire damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Flammable objects in the Cone that aren't being worn or carried start burning. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d6 for each spell slot level above 1. CALL LIGHTNING Level 3 Conjuration (Druid) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes A storm cloud appears at a point within range that you can see above yourself. It takes the shape of a Cylinder that is 10 feet tall with a 60-foot radius. When you cast the spell, choose a point you can see under the cloud. A lightning bolt shoots from the cloud to that point. Each creature within 5 feet of that point makes a Dexterity saving throw, tak- ing 3d10 Lightning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Until the spell ends, you can take a Magic action to call down lightning in that way again, targeting the same point or a different one. If you're outdoors in a storm when you cast this spell, the spell gives you control over that storm in- stead of creating a new one. Under such conditions, the spell's damage increases by idi(. Using a Higher-Level Spell Sisi. 'xe damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spell slot ievel above 3. CALM EMOTIONS Level 2 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: VS: Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Each Humanoid in a 20-foot-radius Sphere centered ona point you choose within range must succeed ona Charisma saving throw or be affected by one of the following effects (choose for each creature):. The creature has Immunity to the Charmed and Frightened conditions until the spell ends. If the creature was already Charmed or Frightened, those conditions are suppressed for the duration.. The creature becomes Indifferent about crea- tures of your choice that it's Hostile toward. This indifference ends if the target takes damage or witnesses its allies taking damage. When the spell ends, the creature's attitude returns to normal. CHAIN LIGHTNING Level 6 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (three silver pins) Duration: Instantaneous You launch a lightning bolt toward a target you can see within range. Three bolts then leap from that target to as many as three other targets of your choice, each of which must be within 30 feet of the first target. A target can be a creature or an object and can be targeted by only one of the bolts. Each target makes a Dexterity saving throw, tak- ing 10d8 Lightning damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. One additional bolt leaps from the first target to another target for each spell slot level above 6. CHARM MONSTER Level 4 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour One creature you can see within range makes a Wisdom saving throw. It does so with Advantage if you or your allies are fighting it. On a failed save, the target has the Charmed condition until the\_ spell ends or until you or your allies damage it. The Charmed creature is Friendly to you. When the spell ends, the target knows it was Charmed by you. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 4. # ------------ Charm Person Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: 1 hour One Humanoid you can see within range makes a Wisdom saving throw. It does so with Advantage if you or your allies are fighting it. On a failed save, the target has the Charmed condition until the spell ends or until you or your allies damage it. The Charmed creature is Friendly to you. When the spell ends, the target knows it was Charmed by you. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can target one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. CHILL Touch Necromancy Cantrip (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Touch Components: V, S 1 Duration: Instantaneous if Channeling the chill of the grave, make a melee spell attack against a target within reach. On a hit, } the target takes 1d10 Necrotic damage, and it can't ' regain Hit Points until the end of your next turn. 1 Cantrip Upgrade. The damage increases by 1d10 when you reach levels 5 (2d10), 11 (3d10), and 17 (4d10). \<-\> CHROMATIC ORB Level 1 Evocation (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet 2 Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth 50+ GP) Duration: Instantaneous You hurl an orb of energy at a target within range. Choose Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Poison, or Thun- der for the type of orb you create, and then m: ranged spell attack against the target. On a hil roll against the new target, and make a new damage roll. The orb can't leap again unless you cast the spell with a level 2+ spell slot. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 1. The orb can leap a maximum number of times equal to the level of the slot expended, and a creature can be targeted only once by each casting of this spell. CIRCLE OF DEATH Level 6 Necromancy (Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 150 feet Components: V, S, M (the powder of a crushed black pearl worth 500+ GP) Duration: Instantaneous Negative energy ripples out in a 60-foot-radius Sphere from a point you choose within range. Each creature in that area makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 8d8 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 2d8 for each spell slot level above 6. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS Ay aa HUMAN SORCERER'CHASTISES GHOULS WITH THE UNPREDICTABLE ENERGY OF A --- ee Ons. a CIRCLE OF POWER Level 5 Abjuration (Cleric, Paladin, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes An aura radiates from you in a 30-foot Emanation for the duration. While in the aura, you and your al- lies have Advantage on saving throws against spells and other magical effects. When an affected crea- ture makes a saving throw against a spell or magical effect that allows a save to take only half damage, it takes no damage if it succeeds on the save. CLAIRVOYANCE Level 3 Divination (Bard, Cleric, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: 10 minutes Range: 1 mile Components: V, S, M (a focus worth 100+ GP, either a jeweled horn for hearing or a eye for seeing) Duration: Concentration, up to riutes You create an Invisible sensor +i "in range ina location familiar to you (a pi:.© v.22 have visited ZUZANNA WwuUye --- or seen before) or in an obvious location that is unfamiliar to you (such as behind a door, around a corner, or in a grove of trees). The intangible, invul- nerable sensor remains in place for the duration. When you cast the spell, choose seeing or hearing. You can use the chosen sense through the sensor as if you were in its space. As a Bonus Action, you can switch between seeing and hearing. Acreature that sees the sensor (such as a creature benefiting from See Invisibility or Truesight) sees a luminous orb about the size of your fist. CLONE Level 8 Necromancy (Wizard) Casting Time: 1 hour Range: Touch Components: V, S, M (a diamond worth 1,000+ GP, which the spell consumes, and a sealable vessel worth 2,000+ GP that is large enough to hold the creature being cloned) Duration: Instantaneous You touch a creature or at least 1 cubic inch of its flesh. An inert duplicate of that creature forms inside the vessel used in the spell's casting and fin- ishes growing after 120 days; you choose whether the finished clone is the same age as the creature or younger. The clone remains inert and endures indef- initely while its vessel remains undisturbed. If the original creature dies after the clone fin- ishes forming, the creature's soul transfers to the clone if the soul is free and willing to return. The clone is physically identical to the original and has the same personality, memories, and abilities, but none of the original's equipment. The creature's original remains, if any, become inert and can't be revived, since the creature's soul is elsewhere. CLOUDKILL Level 5 Conjuration (Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 120 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You create a 20-foot-radius Sphere of yellow-green fog centered on a point within range. The fog lasts for the duration or until strong wind (such as the one created by Gust of Wind) disperses it, ending the spell. Its area is Heavily Obscured. Each creature in the Sphere makes a Constitution saving throw, taking 5d8 Poison damage on a failed save or half as rauch damage on a successful one. A creature musi »!so make this save when the Sphere moves into its s.:ace and when it enters the Sphere or ends its turn there. A creature makes this save only once per turn. The Sphere moves 10 feet away from you at the start of each of your turns. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 5. CLoup oF Daccers Level 2 Conjuration (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S, M (a sliver of glass) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You conjure spinning daggers in a 5-foot Cube centered on a point within range. Each creature in that area takes 4d4 Slashing damage. A creature also takes this damage if it enters the Cube or ends its turn there or if the Cube moves into its space. A creature takes this damage only once per turn. On your later turns, you can take a Magic action to teleport the Cube up to 30 feet. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 2d4 for each spell slot level above 2. Co.or Spray Level 1 Illusion (Bard, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a pinch of colorful sand) Duration: Instantaneous You launch a dazzling array of flashing, colorful light. Each creature in a 15-foot Cone originating from you must succeed on a Constitution saving throw or have the Blinded condition until the end of your next turn. COMMAND Level 1 Enchantment (Bard, Cleric, Paladin) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V Duration: Instantaneous You speak a one-word command to a creature you can see within range. The target must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or follow the command on its next turn. Choose the command from these options: Approach. The target moves toward you by the shortest and most direct route, ending its turn if it moves within 5 feet of you. Drop. The target drops whatever it is holding and then ends its turn. # CHAPTER \| SPELLS | > & Flee. The target spends its turn moving away from you by the fastest available means. = Grovel. The target has the Prone condition and then ends its turn. Halt. On its turn, the target doesn't move and takes no action or Bonus Action. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. You can affect one additional creature for each spell slot level above 1. COMMUNE Level 5 Divination (Cleric) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (incense) Duration: 1 minute You contact a deity or a divine proxy and ask up to three questions that can be answered with yes or no. You must ask your questions before the spell ends. You receive a correct answer for each question. Divine beings aren't necessarily omniscient, so you might receive "unclear" as an answer if a ques- tion pertains to information that lies beyond the deity's knowledge. In a case where a one-word an- swer could be misleading or contrary to the deity's interests, the DM might offer a short phrase as an answer instead. If you cast the spell more than once before finish- ing a Long Rest, there is a cumulative 25 percent chance for each casting after the first that you get no answer. COMMUNE WITH NATURE Level 5 Divination (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: 1 minute or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S Duration: Instantaneous You commune with nature spirits and gain knowl- edge of the surrounding area. In the outdoors, the spell gives you knowledge of the area within 3 miles of you. In caves and other natural underground settings, the radius is limited to 300 feet. The spell doesn't function where nature has been replaced by construction, such as in castles and settlements. Choose three of the following facts; you learn those facts as they pertain to the spell's area: - Locations of settlements - Locations of portals to other planes of existence - Location of one Challenge Rating 10+ creature (DM's choice) that is a Celestial, an Elemental, a Fey, a Fiend, or an Undead # CHAPTER \| SPELLS - The most prevalent kind of plant, miners, or Beast (you choose which to learn) - Locations of bodies of water For example, you could determine the location of a powerful monster in the area, the locations of bod- ies of water, and the locations of any towns. COMPELLED DUEL Level 1 Enchantment (Paladin) Casting Time: Bonus Action Range: 30 feet Components: V Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute You try to compel a creature into a duel. One crea- ture that you can see within range makes a Wisdom saving throw. On a failed save, the target has Disad- vantage on attack rolls against creatures other than you, and it can't willingly move to a space that is more than 30 feet away from you. The spell ends if you make an attack roll against a creature other than the target, if you cast a spell on an enemy other than the target, if an ally of yours damages the target, or if you end your turn more than 30 feet away from the target. COMPREHEND LANGUAGES Level 1 Divination (Bard, Sorcerer, Warlock, Wizard) Casting Time: Action or Ritual Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a pinch of soot and salt) Duration: 1 hour For the duration, you understand the literal mean- ing of any language that you hear or see signed. You also understand any written language that you see, but you must be touching the surface on which the words are written. It takes about 1 minute to read one page of text. This spell doesn't decode symbols or secret messages. COMPULSION Level 4 Enchantment (Bard) Casting Time: Action Range: 30 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Each creature of your choice that you can see within range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw or have the Charmed condition until the spell ends, For the duration, you can take a Bonus Action to designate a direction that is horizontal to you. Each Charmed target must use as much of its movement as possible to move in that direction on its next turn, taking the safest route. After moving in this way, a target repeats the save, ending the spell on itself on a success. CONE OF COLD Level 5 Evocation (Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a small crystal or glass cone) Duration: Instantaneous You unleash a blast of cold air. Each creature ina 60-foot Cone originating from you makes a Consti- tution saving throw, taking 8d8 Cold damage ona failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. A creature killed by this spell becomes a frozen statue until it thaws. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by id8 for each spell slot level above 5. Tre icy Wizaro OriLuke BLASTS MONSTERS wit Cone OF CoLo. CONFUSION Level 4 Enchantment (Bard, Druid, Sorcerer, Wizard) Casting Time: Action Range: 90 feet Components: V, S, M (three nut shells) Duration: Concentration, up to 1 minute Each creature in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered ona point you choose within range must succeed on a Wisdom saving throw, or that target can't take Bonus Actions or Reactions and must roll 1d10 at the start of each of its turns to determine its behav- ior for that turn, consulting the table below. 1d10 Behavior for the Turn 1 The target doesn't take an action, and it uses all its movement to move. Roll 1d4 for the di- rection: 1, north; 2, east; 3, south; or 4, west. 2-6 The target doesn't move or take actions. 7-8 The target doesn't move, and it takes the At- tack action to make one melee attack against a random creature within reach. If none are within reach, the target takes no action. 9-10 The target chooses its behavior. CHAPTER \| SPELLS fe 253 Pte re Nets ee eek SS Py, # 254 --- At the end of each of its turns, an affected tar- get repeats the save, ending the spell on itself ona success. é ' Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The Sphere's radius increases by 5 feet for each spell slot level above 4. CoNnjJURE ANIMALS Level 3 Conjuration (Druid, Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: 60 feet Components: V, S Duration: Concentration, up to 10 minutes You conjure nature spirits that appear as a Large pack of spectral, intangible animals in an unoccu- pied space you can see within range. The pack lasts for the duration, and you choose the spirits' animal form, such as wolves, serpents, or birds. You have Advantage on Strength saving throws while you're within 5 feet of the pack, and when you move on your turn, you can also move the pack up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. Whenever the pack moves within 10 feet of a creature you can see and whenever a creature you can see enters a space within 10 feet of the pack or ends its turn there, you can force that creature to make a Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 3d10 Slashing damage. A creature makes this save only once per turn. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d10 for each spell slot level above 3. CONJURE BARRAGE Level 3 Conjuration (Ranger) Casting Time: Action Range: Self Components: V, S, M (a Melee or Ranged weapon worth at least 1 CP) Duration: Instantaneous You brandish the weapon used to cast the spell and conjure similar spectral weapons (or ammunition appropriate to the weapon) that launch forward and then disappear. Each creature of your choice that you can see in a 60-foot Cone makes a Dexterity saving throw, taking 5d8 Force damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. Using a Higher-Level Spell Slot. The damage in- creases by 1d8 for each spell slot level above 3.