# CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 4 73 LEVEL 6: BLESSED HEALER The healing spells you cast on others heal you as well. Immediately after you cast a spell with a spell slot that restores Hit Points to one or more crea\~ tures other than yourself, you regain Hit Points equal to 2 plus the spell slot's level. LEVEL 17; SUPREME HEALING When you would normally roll one or more dice to restore Hit Points to a creature with a spell or Channel Divinity, don't roll those dice for the heal- ing; instead use the highest number possible for ' each die. For example, instead of restoring 2d6 Hit Points to a creature with a spell, you restore 12. LiGHT DOMAIN \_ Bring Light to Banish Darkness The Light Domain emphasizes the divine power to bring about blazing fire and revelation. Clerics who wield this power are enlightened souls infused with radiance and the power of their deities' discerning vision, charged with chasing away lies and burning away darkness. The Light Domain is associated with gods of truth, vigilance, beauty, insight, and renewal. Some of these gods are identified with the sun or as chari- oteers who guide the sun across the sky. Others are sentinels who pierce deception. Some are deities of beauty and artistry who teach that art is a vehicle for the soul's improvement. LEVEL 3: LIGHT DOMAIN SPELLS Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Light Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. LIGHT DOMAIN SPELLS Cleric Level Prepared Spells 3 Burning Hands, Faerie Fire, Scorching Ray, See Invisibility 5 Daylight, Fireball 7 Arcane Eye, Wall of Fire 9 Flame Strike, Scrying LEVEL 3: RADIANCE OF THE DAWN As a Magic action, you present your Holy Symbol and expend a use of your Channel Divinity to emit a flash of light in a 30-foot Emanation originating from yourself. Any magical Darkness---such as that created by the Darkness spell---in that area is dis- pelled. Additionally, each creature of your choice in that area must make a Constitution saving throw, taking Radiant damage equal to 2d10 plus your Cleric level on a failed save or half as much damage ona successful one. LEVEL 3: WARDING FLARE When a creature that you can see within 30 feet of yourself makes an attack roll, you can take a Re- action to impose Disadvantage on the attack roll, causing light to flare before it hits or misses. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. EVEL 6: \[weeRcveR WARDING FLARE You regain all expended uses of your Warding Flare when you finish a Short or Long Rest. In addition, whenever you use Warding Flare, you can give the target of the triggering attack a num- ber of Temporary Hit Points equal to 2d6 plus your Wisdom modifier. LEVEL 17: CORONA OF LIGHT As a Magic action, you cause yourself to emit an aura of sunlight that lasts for 1 minute or until you dismiss it (no action required). You emit Bright Light in a 60-foot radius and Dim Light for an ad- ditional 30 feet. Your enemies in the Bright Light have Disadvantage on saving throws against your Radiance of the Dawn and any spell that deals Fire or Radiant damage. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. TRICKERY DOMAIN Make Mischief and Challenge Authority The Trickery Domain offers magic of deception, il- lusion, and stealth. Clerics who wield this magic are a disruptive force in the world, puncturing pride, mocking tyrants, freeing captives, and flouting hollow traditions. They prefer subterfuge and pranks to direct confrontation. Gods of trickery are mischief-makers and insti- gators who stand as a constant challenge to the accepted order among both gods and mortals. They embody the forces of change and social up- heaval, and they're patrons of thieves, scoundrels, gamblers, rebels, and liberators. Religious orders that operate in secret, especially those that seek to undermine oppressive governments or hierarchies, also draw on the power of the Trickery Domain. LEVEL 3: BLESSING OF THE TRICKSTER As a Magic action, you can choose yourself or a willing creature within 30 feet of yourself to have Advantage on Dexterity (Stealth) checks. This blessing lasts until you finish a Long Rest or you use this feature again. LEVEL 3: INVOKE DUPLICITY As a Bonus Action, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity to create a perfect visual illusion of yourself in an unoccupied space you can see within 30 feet of yourself. The illusion is intangible and doesn't occupy its space. It lasts for 1 minute, but it ends early if you dismiss it (no action re- quired) or have the Incapacitated condition. The il- lusion is animated and mimics your expressions and gestures. While it persists, you gain the fol! 1g benefits. Cast Spells. You can cast spells as though you were in the illusion's space, but you must use your own senses. Distract. When both you and your illusion are within 5 feet of a creature that can see the illusion, you have Advantage on attack rolls against that creature, given how distracting the illusion is to the target. Move. As a Bonus Action, you can move the illu- sion up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see that is within 120 feet of yourself. LEVEL 3: TRICKERY DOMAIN SPELLS Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the Trickery Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. # Trickery Domain Spells Cleric Level Prepared Spells 3 Charm Person, Disguise Self, Invisibility, Pass without Trace Hypnotic Pattern, Nondetection Confusion, Dimension Door Dominate Person, Modify Memory LEVEL 6: TRICKSTER'S TRANSPOSITION Whenever you take the Bonus Action to create or move the illusion of your Invoke Duplicity, you can teleport, swapping places with the illusion. LEVEL 17: IMPROVED DUPLICITY The illusion of your Invoke Duplicity has grown more powerful in the following ways. Shared Distraction. When you and your allies make attack rolls against a creature within 5 feet of the illusion, the attack rolls have Advantage. Healing Illusion. When the illusion ends, you or a creature of your choice within 5 feet of it regains a number of Hit Points equal to your Cleric level. # War Domain Inspire Valor and Smite Foes War has many manifestations. It can make heroes of ordinary people. It can be desperate and horrific, with acts of cruelty and cowardice eclips- ing instances of excellence and courage. Clerics who tap into the magic of the War Domain excel in battle, inspiring others to fight the good fight or of- fering acts of violence as prayers. Gods of the War Domain watch over warriors and reward them for their great deeds. They include champions of honor and chivalry as well as gods of destruction and pillage. Other war gods take a more neutral stance, promoting war in all its manifesta- tions and supporting warriors in any circumstance. LEVEL 3: GUIDED STRIKE When you or a creature within 30 feet of you misses with an attack roll, you can expend one use of your Channel Divinity and give that roll a +10 bo- nus, potentially causing it to hit. When you use this feature to benefit another creature's attack roll, you must take a Reaction to do so. LEVEL 3: WAR DOMAIN SPELLS Your connection to this divine domain ensures you always have certain spells ready. When you reach a Cleric level specified in the War Domain Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. War DOMAIN SPELLS Cleric Level Prepared Spells 3 Guiding Bolt, Magic Weapon, Shield of Faith, Spiritual Weapon 5 Crusader's Mantle, Spirit Guardians Fire Shield, Freedom of Movement 9 Hold Monster, Steel Wind Strike LEVEL 3: WAR PRIEST As a Bonus Action, you can make one attack with a weapon or an Unarmed Strike. You can use this Bonus Action a number of times equal to your Wis- dom modifier (minimum of once). You regain all ex- pended uses when you finish a Short or Long Rest. LEVEL 6: WAR Gop's BLESSING You can expend a use of your Channel Divinity to cast Shield of Faith or Spiritual Weapon rather than expending a spell slot. When you cast either spell in this way, the spell doesn't require Concentration. Instead the spell lasts for 1 minute, but it ends early if you cast that spell again, have the Incapacitated condition, or die. LEVEL 17: AVATAR OF BATTLE You gain Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage. 7 Ke Tere Druin Tx Yrimary Ab Hit Point Die Wisdom D8 per Druid level Intelligence and Wisdom Saving Throw Proficiencies Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: Arcana, Animal Handling, Insight, Medicine, Nature, Perception, Religion, or Survival Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons Tool Proficiencies Herbalism Kit Light armor and Shields Choose A or B: (A) Leather Armor, Shield, Sickle, Druidic Focus (Quarterstaff), Explor- er's Pack, Herbalism Kit, and Armor Training Starting Equipment RUIDS BELONG TO ANCIENT ORDERS THAT \| call on the forces of nature. Harnessing 2 the magic of animals, plants, and the four elements, Druids heal, transform into animals, and wield elemental destruction. Revering nature above all, individual Druids gain their magic from nature, a nature deity, or both, and they typically unite with other Druids to per- form rites that mark the passage of the seasons and other natural cycles. Druids are concerned with the delicate ecological balance that sustains plant and animal life and with the need for people to live in harmony with nature. Druids often guard sacred sites or watch over re- gions of unspoiled nature, but when a significant danger arises, Druids take a more active role as ad- venturers who combat the threat. # Becoming A Druid... 9 GP; or (B) 50 GP 4 As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Druid Traits table. - Gain the Druid's level 1 features, which are listed in the Druid Features table. As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the following traits from the Core Druid Traits table: Hit Point Die and training with Light armor and Shields. - Gain the Druid's level 1 features, which are listed in the Druid Features table. See the multiclassing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. \~ Druip CLAss FEATURES As a Druid, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Druid levels. These features are listed in the Druid Features table. LEVEL 1: SPELLCASTING You have learned to cast spells through studying the mystical forces of nature. See chapter 7 for the rules on spellcasting. The information below details how you use those rules with Druid spells, which appear on the Druid spell list later in the class's description. Cantrips. You know two cantrips of your choice from the Druid spell list. Druidcraft and Produce Flame are recommended. Whenever you gain a Druid level, you can replace one of your cantrips with another cantrip of your choice from the Druid spell list. When you reach Druid levels 4 and 10, you learn another cantrip of your choice from the Druid spell list, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Druid Features table. Spell Slots. The Druid Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your level 1+ spells. You regain all expended slots when you finish a Long Rest. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose four level 1 spells from the Druid spell list. Animal Friendship, Cure Wounds, Faerie Fire, and Thunderwave are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Druid levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Druid Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional spells from the Druid spell list until the number of spells on your list matches the number on the table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 3 Druid, your list of prepared spells can include six spells of levels 1 and 2 in any combination. If another Druid feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Druid spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can change your list of pre- pared spells, replacing any of the spells with other Druid spells for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Wisdom is your spellcasting ability for your Druid spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use a Druidic Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Druid spells. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES: i B DruiID FEATURES Spell Slots per Speil!.evel--- il Prepared Level eed i Class Features a Cantrips Spells: bal os 3 2 = te 8 9 1 42 Spellcasting, Druidic, --- 2 4 -- Primal Order 2 +2 Wild Shape, 2 2 5 3 ---- ---- ----- ---- --- Fad Wild Companion 3 42 Druid Subclass 2 2 42 ------- 3-7-3 Ss 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement 2 3 43----------------- --- --- ms 5 +3 Wild Resurgence 2 3 9 432---*---------\~------ 6 +3 Subclass feature 3 3 10 433------------------W\~ 7 +3 Elemental Fury 3 3 a 43373=----*+-.+-24 8 43 Ability Score Improvement 3 3 12 433 2-----------~---~--- \~ 9 +4 \_ 3 3 14 4333%%---*---------- 10 +4 Subclass feature 3 4 15 4333 2-----------w\~ u +4 = 3 4 16 43 3 3 2 = ---S 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 3 4 16 4333 271---*--- 13 +5 = 3 4 V7 4333 270171i-=£ 4 +5 Subclass feature 3 4 7 4332 3 2 WV Pee ee 15 +5 Improved Elemental Fury 3 4 18 At Sr 13: 3 21 OR eS 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 3 4 18 433 302 7 To Te v7 tO-0 \| Ga 4 4 19 AS 3 3F 2 a 18 +6 Beast Spells 4 4 20 3 8 33 1 ba 19 +6 Epic Boon 4 4 21 CRE wk ee Samer" ee 7 Se a ie\] \ +6 Archdruid 4 4 22 Ae 3) 3: Bie Bo 2B A LEVEL 1: DRUIDIC You know Druidic, the secret language of Dru- ids. While learning this ancient tongue, you also unlocked the magic of communicating with animals; you always have the Speak with Animals spell prepared. You can use Druidic to leave hidden messages. You and others who know Druidic automatically spot such a message. Others spot the message's pres- ence with a successful DC 15 Intelligence (Investiga- tion) check but can't decipher it without magic. LEVEL 1: PRIMAL ORDER You have dedicated yourself to one of the following sacred roles of your choice. Magician. You know one extra cantrip from the Druid spell list. In addition, your mystical connec- tion to nature gives you a bonus to your Intelligence (Arcana or Nature) checks. The bonus equals your Wisdom modifier (minimum bonus of +1). Warden. Trained for battle, you gain proficiency with Martial weapons and training with Medium armor, LEVEL 2: WILD SHAPE The power of nature allows you to assume the form of an animal. As a Bonus Action, you shape-shift into a Beast form that you have learned for this fea- ture (see "Known Forms" below). You stay in that form for a number of hours equal to half your Druid level or until you use Wild Shape again, have the In- capacitated condition, or die. You can also leave the form early as a Bonus Action. Number of Uses. You can use Wild Shape twice. You regain one expended use when you finish a Short Rest, and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You gain additional uses when you reach certain Druid levels, as shown in the Wild Shape column of the Druid Features table. Known Forms. You know four Beast forms for this feature, chosen from among Beast stat blocks that have a maximum Challenge Rating of 1/4 and that lack a Fly Speed (see appendix B for stat block op- tions). The Rat, Riding Horse, Spider, and Wolf are recommended, Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can replace one of your known forms with an- other eligible form. When you reach certain Druid levels, your num- ber of known forms and the maximum Challenge Rating for those forms increases, as shown in the Beast Shapes table. In addition, starting at level 8, you can adopt a form that has a Fly Speed. When choosing known forms, you may look in the Monster Manual or elsewhere for eligible Beasts if the Dungeon Master permits you to do so. Beast SHAPES Druid Known Max Fly Level Forms CR Speed 2 4 WA No 4 6 2 No 8 8 1 Yes Rules While Shape-Shifted. While in a form, you retain your personality, memories, and ability to speak, and the following rules apply: Temporary Hit Points. When you assume a Wild Shape form, you gain a number of Temporary Hit Points equal to your Druid level. Game Statistics. Your game statistics are replaced by the Beast's stat block, but you retain your crea- ture type; Hit Points; Hit Point Dice; Intelligence, Wisdom, and Charisma scores; class features; languages; and feats. You also retain your skill and saving throw proficiencies and use your Pro- ficiency Bonus for them, in addition to gaining the proficiencies of the creature. If a skill or saving throw modifier in the Beast's stat block is higher than yours, use the one in the stat block. No Spellcasting. You can't cast spells, but shape- shifting doesn't break your Concentration or oth- erwise interfere with a spell you've already cast. Objects. Your ability to handle objects is deter- mined by the form's limbs rather than your own. In addition, you choose whether your equipment falls in your space, merges into your new form, or is worn by it. Worn equipment functions as nor- mal, but the DM decides whether it's practical for the new form to wear a piece of equipment based on the creature's size and shape. Your equipment doesn't change size or shape to match the new form, and any equipment that the new form can't wear must either fall to the ground or merge with the form. Equipment that merges with the form has no effect while you're in that form. LEVEL 2: WILD COMPANION You can summon a nature spirit that assumes an animal form to aid you. As a Magic action, you can expend a spell slot or a use of Wild Shape to cast the Find Familiar spell without Material components. When you cast the spell in this way, the familiar is Fey and disappears when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 3: DRUID SUBCLASS You gain a Druid subclass of your choice. The Circle of the Land, Circle of the Moon, Circle of the Sea, and Circle of the Stars subclasses are detailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Druid levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your sub- class's features that are of your Druid level or lower. LEVEL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Druid levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: WILD RESURGENCE Once on each of your turns, if you have no uses of Wild Shape left, you can give yourself one use by expending a spell slot (no action required). In addition, you can expend one use of Wild Shape (no action required) to give yourself a level 1 spell slot, but you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 7: ELEMENTAL FuRY The might of the elements flows through you. You gain one of the following options of your choice. Potent Spellcasting. Add your Wisdom modifier to the damage you deal with any Druid cantrip. Primal Strike. Once on each of your turns when you hit a creature with an attack roll using a weapon or a Beast form's attack in Wild Shape, you can cause the target to take an extra 1d8 Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Thunder damage (choose when you hit). LEVEL 15: IMPROVED ELEMENTAL FURY The option you chose for Elemental Fury grows more powerful, as detailed below. Potent Spellcasting. When you cast a Druid can- trip with a range of 10 feet or greater, the spell's range increases by 300 feet. Primal Strike. The extra damage of your Primal Strike increases to 2d8. LEVEL 18: BEAST SPELLS While using Wild Shape, you can cast spells in Beast form, except for any spell that has a Material component with a cost specified or that consumes its Material component. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Dimensional Travel is recommended. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES ns) SS fe ---- ™ eT as. \* 82 A Druid CHANNELS THE POWER OF # Nature Through Their Magic. LEVEL 20: ARCHDRUID 7 The vitality of nature constantly blooms within you, granting you the following benefits. Evergreen Wild Shape. Whenever you roll Initia- tive and have no uses of Wild Shape left, you regain one expended use of it. Nature Magician. You can convert uses of Wild Shape into a spell slot (no action required). Choose a number of your unexpended uses of Wild Shape and convert them into a single spell slot, with each use contributing 2 spell levels. For example, if you convert two uses of Wild Shape, you produce a level 4 spell slot. Once you use this benefit, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. Longevity. The primal magic that you wield causes you to age more slowly. For every ten years that pass, your body ages only one year. DruipD SPELL List This section presents the Druid spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alphabetized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Spe- cial column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material component. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES CaNTRIPS (LEVEL O DRUID SPELLS) Spell Druidcraft Elementalism Guidance Mending Message Poison Spray Produce Flame Resistance Shillelagh Spare the Dying Starry Wisp Thorn Whip Thunderclap LeveL 1 DRuID SPELLS Spell Animal Friendship Charm Person Create or Destroy Water Cure Wounds School Transmutation Transmutation Divination Transmutation Transmutation Necromancy Conjuration Abjuration Transmutation Necromancy Evocation Transmutation Evocation School Enchantment Enchantment Transmutation Abjuration Special Cc Special Spell Detect Magic Detect Poison and Disease Entangle Faerie Fire Fog Cloud Goodberry Healing Word Ice Knife Jump Longstrider Protection from Evil and Good Purify Food and Drink Speak with Animals Thunderwave Lever 2 Druip SPELLs Spell Aid Animal Messenger Augury Barkskin Beast Sense Continual Flame Darkvision Enhance Ability Enlarge/Reduce Find Traps Flame Blade Flaming Sphere Gust of Wind Heat Metal Hold Person Lesser Restoration Locate Animals or Plants Locate Object Moonbeam Pass without Trace Protection from Poison Spike Growth Summon Beast School Divination Divination Conjuration Evocation Conjuration Conjuration Abjuration Conjuration Transmutation Transmutation Abjuration Transmutation Divination Evocation School Abjuration Enchantment Divination Transmutation Divination Evocation Transmutation Transmutation Transmutation Divination Evocation Evocation Evocation Transmutation Enchantment Abjuration Divination Divination Evocation Abjuration Abjuration Transmutation Conjuration Special CR Cc,R S Cc Le Special # R R,m LeveL 3 Druip SpeLts Spell Aura of Vitality Call Lightning Conjure Animals Daylight Dispel Magic Elemental Weapon Feign Death Meld into Stone Plant Growth Protection from Energy Revivify Sleet Storm Speak with Plants Summon Fey Water Breathing Water Walk Wind Wall Levet 4 DruipD SPELLS Spell Blight Charm Monster Confusion Conjure Minor Elementals Conjure Woodland Beings Control Water Divination Dominate Beast Fire Shield Fount of Moonlight Freedom of Movement Giant Insect Grasping Vine Hallucinatory Terrain Ice Storm Locate Creature Polymorph Stone Shape Stoneskin Summon Elemental Wall of Fire # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES = School Abjuration Conjuration Conjuration Evocation Abjuration Transmutation Necromancy Transmutation Transmutation Abjuration Necromancy Conjuration Transmutation Conjuration Transmutation Transmutation Evocation School Necromancy Enchantment Enchantment Conjuration Conjuration Transmutation Divination Enchantment Evocation Evocation Abjuration Conjuration Conjuration Iusion Evocation Divination Transmutation Transmutation Transmutation Conjuration Evocation Special iS Cc c Special anan R,M c,M cM 83 Levet 5 Druip SPELLS Spell Antilife Shell Awaken Commune with Nature Cone of Cold Conjure Elemental Contagion Geas Greater Restoration Insect Plague Mass Cure Wounds Planar Binding Reincarnate Scrying Tree Stride Wall of Stone Levet 6 Druip SPELLS Spell Conjure Fey Find the Path Flesh to Stone Heal Heroes' Feast Move Earth Sunbeam Transport via Plants Wall of Thorns Wind Walk Levet 7 Druip SPELLS Spell Fire Storm Mirage Arcane Plane Shift Regenerate Reverse Gravity Symbol LeveL 8 Druip SPELLS Spell Animal Shapes Antipathy/Sympathy Befuddlement Control Weather School Special Abjuration c Transmutation M Divination R Evocation = Conjuration c Necromancy --- Enchantment *Abjuration M Conjuration Cc Abjuration* --- Abjuration M Necromancy M Divination cM Conjuration Cc Evocation Le School Special Conjuration Cc Divination c,M Transmutation G. Abjuration --- Conjuration M Transmutation Cc Evocation c Conjuration --- Conjuration Cc Transmutation --- School Special Evocation Illusion \_--- Conjuration M Transmutation --- Transmutation c Abjuration M School Special Transmutation --- Enchantment Enchantment --- Transmutation Cc. CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES | School Special Spell Earthquake Transmutation Cc Incendiary Cloud Conjuration Cc Sunburst Evocation = Tsunami Conjuration Cc LeveL 9 Druip SPELLS Spell School Special Foresight Divination --- Shapechange Transmutation C,M Storm of Vengeance Conjuration Cc True Resurrection Necromancy M # Druid Subclasses A Druid subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Druid levels, as specified in the subclass. Druids form loose associations, which they call circles. This section presents the Circle of the Land, Circle of the Moon, Circle of the Sea, and Cir- cle of the Stars subclasses. CIRCLE OF THE LAND Celebrate Connection to the Natural World The Circle of the Land comprises mystics and sages who safeguard ancient knowledge and rites. These Druids meet within sacred circles of trees or stand- ing stones to whisper primal secrets in Druidic. The circle's wisest members preside as the chief priests of their communities. LEVEL 3: CIRCLE OF THE LAND SPELLS Whenever you finish a Long Rest, choose one type of land: arid, polar, temperate, or tropical. Consult the table below that corresponds to the chosen type; you have the spells listed for your Druid level and lower prepared. Arip LAND Druid Level Circle Spells 3 Blur, Burning Hands, Fire Bolt 5 Fireball 7 Blight =\] Wall of Stone Potar LAND Druid Level Circle Spells 3 Fog Cloud, Hold Person, Ray of Frost 5 Sleet Storm 7 Ice Storm 9 Cone of Cold TEMPERATE LAND Druid Level \_ Circle Spells Misty Step, Shocking Grasp, Sleep Lightning Bolt Freedom of Movement Tree Stride wonuy TROPICAL LAND Druid Level Circle Spells Acid Splash, Ray of Sickness, Web Stinking Cloud Polymorph wonuw Insect Plague LEVEL 3: LAND's AID As a Magic action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape and choose a point within 60 feet of yourself. Vitality-giving flowers and life-draining thorns appear for a moment in a 10-foot-radius Sphere centered on that point. Each creature of your choice in the Sphere must make a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC, taking 246 Necrotic damage on a failed save or half as much damage on a successful one. One creature of your choice in that area regains 2d6 Hit Points. The damage and healing increase by 1d6 when you reach Druid levels 10 (3d6) and 14 (4d6). LEVEL 6: NATURAL RECOVERY You can cast one of the level 1+ spells that you have prepared from your Circle Spells feature without expending a spell slot, and you must finish a Long Rest before you do so again. In addition, when you finish a Short Rest, you can choose expended spell slots to recover. The spell slots can have a combined level that is equal to or less than half your Druid level (round up), and none of them can be level 6+. For example, if you're a level 6 Druid, you can recover up to three levels' worth of spell slots. You can recover a level 3 spell slot, a level 2 and a level 1 spell slot, or three level 1 spell slots. Once you recover spell slots with this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. LeveL 10: NATURE'S WARD You are immune to the Poisoned condition, and you have Resistance to a damage type associated with your current land choice in the Circle Spells feature, as shown in the Nature's Ward table. Nature's WarD Land Type Resistance Land Type Resistance Arid Fire Temperate Lightning Polar Cold Tropical Poison Circve oF THE Lano Susciass Circre oF THE Moon Susciass LEVEL 14: NATURE'S SANCTUARY As a Magic action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape and cause spectral trees and vines to appear in a 15-foot Cube on the ground within 120 feet of yourself. They last there for 1 minute or until you have the Incapacitated condition or die. You and your allies have Half Cover while in that area, and your allies gain the current Resistance of your Nature's Ward while there. As a Bonus Action, you can move the Cube up to 60 feet to ground within 120 feet of yourself. CIRCLE OF THE MOON Adopt Animal Forms to Guard the Wilds Druids of the Circle of the Moon draw on lunar magic to transform themselves. Their order gathers under the moon to share news and perform rituals. Changeable as the moon, a Druid of this circle might prowl as a great cat one night, soar over the treetops as an eagle the next day, and then crash through undergrowth as a bear to drive off a tres- passing monster. The wild is in the Druid's blood. LEVEL 3: CIRCLE FORMS You can channel lunar magic when you assume a Wild Shape form, granting you the benefits below. Challenge Rating. The maximum Challenge Rating for the form equals your Druid level divided by 3 (round down). Armor Class. Until you leave the form, your AC equals 13 plus your Wisdom modifier if that total is higher than the Beast's AC. Temporary Hit Points. You gain a number of Tem- porary Hit Points equal to three times your Druid level. LEVEL 3: CIRCLE OF THE MOON SPELLS When you reach a Druid level specified in the Circle of the Moon Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. In addition, you can cast the spells from this fea- ture while you're in a Wild Shape form. CIRCLE OF THE MOON SPELLS Druid Level Prepared Spells Cure Wounds, Moonbeam, Starry Wisp Conjure Animals Fount of Moonlight Mass Cure Wounds wn ue A Druid IN WOLF FORM # Howls At The Moon LEVEL 6: IMPROVED CIRCLE FORMS While in a Wild Shape form, you gain the following benefits. Lunar Radiance. Each of your attacks in a Wild Shape form can deal its normal damage type or Ra- diant damage. You make this choice each time you hit with those attacks. Increased Toughness. You can add your Wisdom modifier to your Constitution saving throws. LEVEL 10: MOONLIGHT STEP You magically transport yourself, reappearing amid a burst of moonlight. As a Bonus Action, you tele- port up to 30 feet to an unoccupied space you can see, and you have Advantage on the next attack roll you make before the end of this turn. You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. You can also regain uses by expending a level 2+ spell slot for each use you want to restore (no action required). LEVEL 14: LUNAR FORM The power of the moon suffuses you, granting you the following benefits. Improved Lunar Radiance. Once per turn, you can deal an extra 2d10 Radiant damage to a target you hit with a Wild Shape form's attack. Shared Moonlight. Whenever you use Moonlight Step, you can also teleport one willing creature. That creature must be within 10 feet of you, and you teleport it to an unoccupied space you can see within 10 feet of your destination space. # Cirgle Of The Sea Become One with Tides and Storms Druids of the Circle of the Sea draw on the tem- pestuous forces of oceans and storms. Some view themselves as embodiments of nature's wrath, seek- ing vengeance against those who despoil nature. Others seek mystical unity with nature by attuning themselves to the ebb and flow of the tides, follow- ing the rush of currents and waves and listening to the inscrutable whispers and roars of the winds. LEVEL 3: CIRCLE OF THE SEA SPELLS When you reach a Druid level specified in the Circle of the Sea Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. CIRCLE OF THE SEA SPELLS Druid Level Prepared Spells 3 Fog Cloud, Gust of Wind, Ray of Frost, Shatter, Thunderwave Lightning Bolt, Water Breathing Control Water, Ice Storm Conjure Elemental, Hold Monster LEVEL 3: WRATH OF THE SEA As a Bonus Action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape to manifest a 5-foot Emanation that takes the form of ocean spray that surrounds you for 10 minutes. It ends early if you dismiss it (no action required), manifest it again, or have the Inca- pacitated condition. When you manifest the Emanation and as a Bonus Action on your subsequent turns, you can choose another creature you can see in the Emanation. The target must succeed on a Constitution saving throw against your spell save DC or take Cold damage and, if the creature is Large or smaller, be pushed up to 15 feet away from you. To determine this damage, roll a number of d6s equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of one die). LEVEL 6: AQUATIC AFFINITY The size of the Emanation created by your Wrath of the Sea increases to 10 feet. In addition, you gain a Swim Speed equal to your Speed. LEVEL 10: STORMBORN Your Wrath of the Sea confers two more benefits while active, as detailed below. Flight. You gain a Fly Speed equal to your Speed. Resistance. You have Resistance to Cold, Light- ning, and Thunder damage. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 87 LEVEL 14: OCEANIC GIFT Instead of manifesting the Emanation of Wrath of the Sea around yourself, you can manifest it around one willing creature within 60 feet of yourself. That creature gains all the benefits of the Emanation and uses your spell save DC and Wisdom modifier for it, In addition, you can manifest the Emanation around both the other creature and yourself if you expend two uses of your Wild Shape instead of one when manifesting it. # Circle Of The Stars Harness Secrets Hidden in Constellations The Circle of the Stars has tracked heavenly pat- terns since time immemorial, discovering secrets hidden amid the constellations. By understanding these secrets, the Druids of this circle seek to har- ness the powers of the cosmos. LEVEL 3: STAR MAP You've created a star chart as part of your heavenly studies. It is a Tiny object, and you can use it asa Spellcasting Focus for your Druid spells. You deter- mine its form by rolling on the Star Map table or by choosing one. While holding the map, you have the Guidance and Guiding Bolt spells prepared, and you can cast Guid- ing Bolt without expending a spell slot. You can cast it in that way a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. If you lose the map, you can perform a 1-hour ceremony to magically create a replacement. This ceremony can be performed during a Short or Long Rest, and it destroys the previous map. Star Map 1d6 Map Form 1 Ascroll bearing depictions of constellations A stone tablet with fine holes drilled through it An owlbear hide tooled with stellar symbols A collection of maps bound in an ebony cover A crystal engraved with starry patterns Dnurkwn A glass disk etched with constellations LEVEL 3: STARRY FORM Asa Bonus Action, you can expend a use of your Wild Shape feature to take on a starry form rather than shape-shifting. While in your starry form, you retain your game statistics, but your body becomes luminous, your joints glimmer like stars, and glowing lines connect them as ona star chart. This form sheds Bright Light in a 10-foot radius and Dim Light for an addi- tional 10 feet. The form lasts for 10 minutes. It ends Ciacte oF THE Sea Supciass wed early if you dismiss it (no action required), have the Incapacitated condition, or use this feature again. Whenever you assume your starry form, choose which of the following constellations glimmers on your body; your choice gives you certain benefits while in the form. Archer. A constellation of an archer appears on you. When you activate this form and as a Bonus Action on your subsequent turns while it lasts, you can make a ranged spell attack, hurling a luminous arrow that targets one creature within 60 feet of yourself. On a hit, the attack deals Radiant damage equal to 1d8 plus your Wisdom modifier. Chalice. A constellation of a life-giving goblet appears on you. Whenever you cast a spell using a spell slot that restores Hit Points to a creature, you or another creature within 30 feet of you can regain Hit Points equal to 1d8 plus your Wisdom modifier. Dragon. A constellation of a wise dragon ap- pears on you. When you make an Intelligence ora Wisdom check or a Constitution saving throw to maintain Concentration, you can treat a roll of 9 or lower on the d20 as a 10. LEVEL 6: COSMIC OMEN Whenever you finish a Long Rest, you can consult your Star Map for omens and roll a die. Until you finish your next Long Rest, you gain access to a spe- cial Reaction based on whether you rolled an even or an odd number on the die: Weal (Even). Whenever a creature you can see within 30 feet of you is about to make a D20 Test, you can take a Reaction to roll 1d6 and add the number rolled to the total. Woe (Odd). Whenever a creature you can see within 30 feet of you is about to make a D20 Test, you can take a Reaction to roll 1d6 and subtract the number rolled from the total. You can use this Reaction a number of times equal to your Wisdom modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 10: TWINKLING CONSTELLATIONS The constellations of your Starry Form improve. The 1d8 of the Archer and the Chalice becomes 2d8, and while the Dragon is active, you have a Fly Speed of 20 feet and can hover. Moreover, at the start of each of your turns while in your Starry Form, you can change which constel- lation glimmers on your body. LeveL 14: FULL OF STARS While in your Starry Form, you become partially incorporeal, giving you Resistance to Bludgeoning, Piercing, and Slashing damage. | b | | Circve oF tHE Stars | Suactass | # Nestor Ossandon Leal CoRE FIGHTER TRAITS Primary Ability Hit Point Die Saving Throw Proficiencies Strength or Dexterity D10 per Fighter level Strength and Constitution Skill Proficiencies Choose 2: Acrobatics, Animal Handling, Athletics, History, Insight, Intimidation, Persua- \| sion, Perception, or Survival Weapon Proficiencies Simple and Martial weapons Light, Medium, and Heavy armor and Shields Choose A, B, or C: (A) Chain Mail, Greatsword, Flail, 8 Javelins, Dungeoneer's Pack, and 4 GP; (B) Studded Leather Armor, Scimitar, Shortsword, Longbow, 20 Ar- rows, Quiver, Dungeoneer's Pack, and 11 GP; or (C) # 155 Gp # Ighters Rule Many Battlefields. | =\| Questing knights, royal champions, elite sol- \~. diers, and hardened mercenaries---as Fighters, they all share an unparalleled prowess with weap- ons and armor. And they are well acquainted with death, both meting it out and defying it. Fighters master various weapon techniques, and a well-equipped Fighter always has the right tool at hand for any combat situation. Likewise, a Fighter is adept with every form of armor. Beyond that basic degree of familiarity, each Fighter specializes in cer- tain styles of combat. Some concentrate on archery, some on fighting with two weapons at once, and some on augmenting their martial skills with magic. This combination of broad ability and extensive spe- cialization makes Fighters superior combatants. Armor Training Starting Equipment