# Sorcerer Features Proficiency Sorcery Level Bonus \_\_ Class Features Points 1 +2 Spellcasting, = Innate Sorcery 2 +2 Font of Magic, 2 Metamagic +2 Sorcerer Subclass +2 Ability Score Improvement 5 +3 Sorcerous 5 Restoration +3 Subclass feature 6 +3 Sorcery Incarnate 8 43 Ability Score Improvement 9 +4 \_ 9 10 +4 Metamagic 10 u +4 --- N 12 +4 Ability Score 12 Improvement 13 +5 --- 13 14 +5 Subclass feature 14 15 +5 ad 15 16 +5 Ability Score 16 Improvement 7 +6 Metamagic 7 18 +6 Subclass feature 18 19 +6 Epic Boon 19 20 +6 Arcane Apotheosis 20 Sorcerer spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the Sorcerer Features table. The chosen spells must be of a level for which you have spell slots. For example, if you're a level 3 Sorcerer, your list of prepared spells can include six Sorcerer spells of level 1 or 2 in any combination. If another Sorcerer feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Sorcerer spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Sorcerer level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Sorcerer spell for which you have spell slots. Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is your spellcasting ability for your Sorcerer spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Sorcerer spells. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES Cantrips Spell Slots per Spell Level Prepared Spells 123 4 5 6 7 8 9 4 2 Zi. ea Ss re ee 4 4 FSS SS SS SS SS eS 6 BB a ee SN ee ee 7 3 = eee es eet Se, 5 9 43 PD\] S S++ 2 = 5 10 433 ---~--------------~ 5 n 433 1-----\>--\>--------\>------- 5 12 433 2----------- ------ --- 5 14 43331=-------------- 6 15 433 32---------- --- 6 16 4333 21---\>------ 6 16 4 3 3 3 2131---------- 6 7 4333 217131----------- 6 7 Ao BEB) SP Be. Tb SS 6 18 408. Be ce he ab oa = 6 18 4. 3 Be 3. 2 Te Te 6 19 ee 8 St 2 AP Oe Sr A 6 20 44 PFS Be AT A 6 21 BY GBS Be QED Me ST 6 22 a ae Se a ey \| \| LEVEL 1: INNATE SORCERY An event in your past left an indelible mark on you, infusing you with simmering magic. As a Bonus Action, you can unleash that magic for 1 minute, during which you gain the following benefits: - The spell save DC of your Sorcerer spells increases by 1. - You have Advantage on the attack rolls of Sorcerer spells you cast. You can use this feature twice, and you regain all expended uses of it when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 2: FONT OF MAGIC You can tap into the wellspring of magic within yourself. This wellspring is represented by Sorcery Points, which allow you to create a varicty of magi- cal effects. EE You have 2 Sorcery Points, and you gain more as you reach higher levels, as shown in the Sorcery Points column of the Sorcerer Features table. You can't have more Sorcery Points than the number shown in the table for your level. You regain all ex- pended Sorcery Points when you finish a Long Rest. You can use your Sorcery Points to fuel the options below, along with other features, such as Metamagic, that use those points. Converting Spell Slots to Sorcery Points. You can expend a spell slot to gain a number of Sorcery Points equal to the slot's level (no action required). Creating Spell Slots. As a Bonus Action, you can transform unexpended Sorcery Points into one spell slot. The Creating Spell Slots table shows the cost of creating a spell slot of a given level, and it lists the minimum Sorcerer level you must be to create aslot. You can create a spell slot no higher than level 5. Any spell slot you create with this feature van- ishes when you finish a Long Rest. # Creating Spell Slots Spell Slot Sorcery Point Min, Sorcerer Level Cost Level 1 2 2 2 3 3 3 5 # 5 4 6 7 5 7 9 LEvEL 2: METAMAGIC Because your magic flows from within, you can alter your spells to suit your needs; you gain two Metamagic options of your choice from "Metamagic Options" later in this class's description. You use the chosen options to temporarily modify spells you cast. To use an option, you must spend the num- ber of Sorcery Points that it costs. You can use only one Metamagic option on a spell when you cast it unless otherwise noted in one of those options. Whenever you gain a Sorcerer level, you can re- place one of your Metamagic options with one you don't know. You gain two more options at Sorcerer level 10 and two more at Sorcerer level 17. LEVEL 3: SORCERER SUBCLASS You gain a Sorcerer subclass of your choice. The Aberrant Sorcery, Clockwork Sorcery, Draconic Sorcery, and Wild Magic Sorcery subclasses are detailed after this class's description, A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Sorcerer levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Sorcerer level or lower. ee LeveL 4: ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Sorcerer levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 5: SORCEROUS RESTORATION When you finish a Short Rest, you can regain ex- pended Sorcery Points, but no more than a number equal to half your Sorcerer level (round down). Once you use this feature, you can't do so again un- til you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 7: SORCERY INCARNATE If you have no uses of Innate Sorcery left, you can use it if you spend 2 Sorcery Points when you take the Bonus Action to activate it. In addition, while your Innate Sorcery feature is active, you can use up to two of your Metamagic options on each spell you cast. LEVEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Dimensional Travel is recommended. LEVEL 20: ARCANE APOTHEOSIS While your Innate Sorcery feature is active, you can use one Metamagic option on each of your turns without spending Sorcery Points on it. # Metamagic Options The following options are available to your Meta- magic feature. The options are presented in alpha- betical order. CAREFUL SPELL Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you cast a spell that forces other creatures to make a saving throw, you can protect some of those creatures from the spell's full force. To do so, spend 1 Sorcery Point and choose a number of those creatures up to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one creature). A chosen creature automatically succeeds on its saving throw against the spell, and it takes no damage if it would normally take half dam- age on a successful save. DISTANT SPELL Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you cast a spell that has a range of at least 5 feet, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to double the spell's range. Or when you cast a spell that has a range of Touch, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to make the spell's range 30 feet. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 141 a= 142 EMPOWERED SPELL Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you roll damage for a spell, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to reroll a number of the damage dice up to your Charisma modifier (minimum of one), and you must use the new rolls. You can use Empowered Spell even if you've al- ready used a different Metamagic option during the casting of the spell. # Extended Spell Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you cast a spell that has a duration of 1 min- ute or longer, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to dou- ble its duration to a maximum duration of 24 hours. If the affected spell requires Concentration, you have Advantage on any saving throw you make to maintain that Concentration. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES HEIGHTENED SPELL Cost: 2 Sorcery Points When you cast a spell that forces a creature to make a saving throw, you can spend 2 Sorcery Points to give one target of the spell Disadvantage on saves against the spell. # Quickened Spell Cost: 2 Sorcery Points When you cast a spell that has a casting time of an action, you can spend 2 Sorcery Points to change the casting time to a Bonus Action for this casting. You can't modify a spell in this way if you've already cast a level 1+ spell on the current turn, nor can you cast a level 1+ spell on this turn after modifying a spell in this way. # Seeking Spell Cost: 1 Sorcery Point If you make an attack roll for a spell and miss, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to reroll the d20, and you must use the new roll. You can use Seeking Spell even if you've already used a different Metamagic option during the cast- ing of the spell. # Subtle Spell Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you cast a spell, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to cast it without any Verbal, Somatic, or Ma- terial components, except Material components that are consumed by the spell or that have a cost specified in the spell. # Transmuted Spell Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you cast a spell that deals a type of damage from the following list, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to change that damage type to one of the other listed types: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, Poi- son, Thunder. TWINNED SPELL Cost: 1 Sorcery Point When you cast a spell, such as Charm Person, that can be cast with a higher-level spell slot to target an additional creature, you can spend 1 Sorcery Point to increase the spell's effective level by 1. SORCERER SPELL List This section presents the Sorcerer spell list. The spells are organized by spell level and then alpha- betized, and each spell's school of magic is listed. In the Special column, C means the spell requires Concentration, R means it's a Ritual, and M means it requires a specific Material componeni. e---\_ CANTRi?s (LEVEL O SORCERER SPELLS) Spell Acid Splash Blade Ward Chill Touch Dancing Lights Elementalism Fire Bolt Friends Light Mage Hand Mending Message Mind Sliver Minor Illusion Poison Spray Prestidigitation Ray of Frost Shocking Grasp Sorcerous Burst Thunderclap True Strike School Evocation Abjuration Necromancy Mlusion Transmutation Evocation Enchantment Evocation Conjuration Transmutation Transmutation Enchantment Illusion Necromancy Transmutation Evocation Evocation Evocation Evocation Divination # Level 1 Sorcerer Spells Spell Burning Hands Charm Person Chromatic Orb Color Spray Comprehend Languages Detect Magic Disguise Self Expeditious Retreat False Life Feather Fall Fog Cloud Grease Ice Knife Jump Mage Armor Magic Missile Ray of Sickness Shield Silent Imave Sleep School Evocation Enchantment Evocation Illusion Divination Divination IIlusion Transmutation Necromancy Transmutation Conjuration Conjuration Conjuration Transmutation Abjuration Evocation Necromancy Abjuration Illusion Enchantment Special (es Cc Special M # R Gr Spell Thunderwave Witch Bolt School Evocation Evocation LeveL 2 SORCERER SPELLS Spell Alter Self Arcane Vigor Blindness/Deafness Blur Cloud of Daggers Crown of Madness Darkness Darkvision Detect Thoughts Dragon's Breath Enhance Ability Enlarge/Reduce Flame Blade Flaming Sphere Gust of Wind Hold Person Invisibility Knock Levitate Magic Weapon Mind Spike Mirror Image Misty Step Phantasmal Force Scorching Ray See Invisibility Shatter Spider Climb Suggestion Web School Transmutation Abjuration Transmutation Mlusion Conjuration Enchantment Evocation Transmutation Divination Transmutation Transmutation Transmutation Evocation Evocation Evocation Enchantment Illusion Transmutation Transmutation Transmutation Divination Illusion Conjuration Illusion Evocation Divination Evocation Transmutation Enchantment Conjuration # Level 3 Sorcerer Spells Spell Blink Clairvoyance Counterspell Daylight Dispel Magic Fear # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES School Transmutation Divination Abjuration Evocation Abjuration Illusion Special Cc Special i japelsaneeannod \[oneal \|e fa} aa" Special c,M € rA2 School Special Spell School Special rg Spell: = Telekinesis Transmutation c! Fireball Evocation;. 3 Fl Transmutation Cc Teleportation Circle Conjuration M; ly 7 1 \| Gaseous Form Transmutation Cc Wall of Stone Evocation € Haste Transmutation Cc LeveL 6 SORCERER SPELLS Hypnotic Pattern Illusion c Spell School Special \| Lightning Bolt Evocation = Arcane Gate Conjuration c \| Major Image Mlusion:. Chain Lightning Evocation --- Protection from Energy Abjuration c Circle of Death Algeromandy Ni \| jurati Cc Sleet Storm Soniuration é Disintegrate Transmutation --- cae Lininweid c Eyebite Necromancy Cc Stinking Cloud eonparaton Flesh to Stone Transmutation c iviriati JS jonguss eunaten Globe of Invulnerability Abjuration c Vampiric Touch Necromancy Cc.: Mass Suggestion Enchantment = Water Breathing Transmutation R; { 7 Move Earth Transmutation c Water Walk Transmutation R ';. I Otiluke's Freezing Sphere Evocation = \| LeveL 4 SORCERER SPELLS Sunbeam Evocation e i Spell School Special True Seeing Divination M Banishment Abjuration c hE}; LEVEL 7 SORCERER SPELLS: Blight Necromancy i oe rr Charm Monster Enchantment --- bet ee ey sie pecs ti Ban Confusion Enchantment c Delayed Blast ticked vOSa ou ¢C H, 2 Resi Etherealness Conjuration *a) Dimension Door Conjuration --- é h nN \| Dominate Beast Enchantment c Finger of Deat Soon --- fife Fire Shield Evocation = glk som evocation = Greater Invisibility Illusion Cc Plane suit Conjuration M Ice Storm Evocation = Prismatic Spray Evocation ce Polymorph Transimutation c Reverse Gravity fransmutation € Stoneskin Transmutation C,M Teleport Conjuration =\> Vitriolic Sphere Evocation = LeveL 8 SORCERER SPELLS Wall of Fire Evocation c Spell School Special LEVEL 5 SORCERER SPELLS Demiplane Conjuration = Spell School Special Dominate Monster Encoevient \[a Animate Objects Transmutation C Earthquake HTransmmutation £ Bigby's Hand Evocation Cc Incendiary Cloud Conjuration c Cloudkill Conjuration c Power Word Stun Enchantment Cone of Cold Evocation = Sunburst Evocation a cation Mllusion = LEVEL 9 SORCERER SPELLS Dominate Person Enchantment C Spell School Special " Hold Monster Enchantment C Gan Gonlieaien CoM Insect Plague Conjuration c Meteor Swart Baéatian = sails Mlusion = Power Word Kill Enchantment --- Synaptic Static Enchantment --- Time Stop TansnitStion \<1 Wish Conjuration* CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES \| ----\_ 2 aes SONANIUS BUDI # Sorcerer Subclasses A Sorcerer subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Sorcerer levels, as specified in the subclass. This section presents the Aberrant Sorcery, Clockwork Sorcery, Draconic Sorcery, and Wild Magic Sorcery subclasses. # Aberrant Sorcery Wield Unnatural Psionic Power An alien influence has wrapped its tendrils around your mind, giving you psionic power. You can now touch other minds with that power and alter the world around you. Will this power shine from you as a hopeful beacon to others? Or will you be a ter- ror to those who feel the stab of your mind? Perhaps a psychic wind from the Astral Plane carried psionic energy to you, or you were exposed to the Far Realm's warping influence. Alternatively, you were implanted with a mind flayer tadpole, but your transformation into a mind flayer never occurred; now the tadpole's psionic power is yours. However you acquired this power, your mind is aflame with it. LEVEL 3: PSIONIC SPELLS When you reach a Sorcerer level specified in the Psionic Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. PsIONIC SPELLS Sorcerer Level Spells 3 Arms of Hadar, Calm Emotions, Detect Thoughts, Dissonant Whis- pers, Mind Sliver 5 Hunger of Hadar, Sending 7 Evard's Black Tentacles, Summon Aberration 9 Rary's Telepathic Bond, Telekinesis LEVEL 3: TELEPATHIC SPEECH You can form a telepathic connection between your mind and the mind of another. As a Bonus Action, choose one creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. You and the chosen creature can com- municate telepathically with each other while the two of you are within a number of miles of each other equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of 1 mile). To understand each other, you each must mentally use a language the other knows. The telepathic connection lasts for a number of minutes equal to your Sorcerer level. It ends early if you use this ability to form a connection with a different creature. ABERRANT Sorcery Suscrass 146 LEVEL 6: Pstonic SORCERY Lott When you cast any level 1+ spell from your Psionic Spells feature, you can cast it by expending a spell slot as normal or by spending a number of Sorcery Points equal to the spell's level. If you cast the spell using Sorcery Points, it requires no Verbal or So- matic components, and it requires no Material com- ponents unless they are consumed by the spell or have a cost specified in it. LEvEL 6: PsycHIC DEFENSES You have Resistance to Psychic damage, and you have Advantage on saving throws to avoid or end the Charmed or Frightened condition. LEVEL 14: REVELATION IN FLESH You can unleash the aberrant truth hidden within yourself. As a Bonus Action, you can spend 1 Sor- cery Point or more to magically alter your body for 10 minutes. For each Sorcery Point you spend, you gain one of the following benefits of your choice, the effects of which last until the alteration ends. Aquatic Adaptation. You gain a Swim Speed equal to twice your Speed, and you can breathe under- water. Gills grow from your neck or flare behind your ears, and your fingers become webbed or you grow wriggling cilia. Glistening Flight. You gain a Fly Speed equal to your Speed, and you can hover. As you fly, your skin glistens with mucus or otherworldly light. See the Invisible. You can see any Invisible crea- ture within 60 feet of yourself that isn't behind Total Cover. Your eyes also turn black or become writhing sensory tendrils. Wormlike Movement. Your body, along with any equipment you are wearing or carrying, becomes slimy and pliable. You can move through any space as narrow as 1 inch, and you can spend 5 feet of movement to escape from nonmagical restraints or the Grappled condition. LEVEL 18: WARPING IMPLOSION You can unleash a space-warping anomaly. As a Magic action, you teleport to an unoccupied space you can see within 120 feet of yourself. Immediately after you disappear, each creature within 30 feet of the space you left must make a Strength saving throw against your spell save DC. Ona failed save, a creature takes 3d10 Force damage and is pulled straight toward the space you left, ending in an un- occupied space as close to your former space as pos- sible. On a successful save, the creature takes half as much damage only. Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest unless you spend 5 Sor- cery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES CLOCKWORK SORCERY \_ \_ Channel Cosmic Forces of Order The cosmic force of order has suffused you with magic. That power arises from Mechanus or a realm like it---a plane of existence shaped entirely by clock- work efficiency. You or someone from your lineage might have become entangled in the machinations of modrons, the orderly beings who inhabit Mecha- nus. Perhaps your ancestor even took part in the Great Modron March. Whatever its origin within you, the power of order can seem strange to others, but for you, it's part of a vast and glorious system. LEVEL 3: CLOCKWORK SPELLS When you reach a Sorcerer level specified in the Clockwork Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. CLockwork SPELLS Sorcerer Level Spells 3 Aid, Alarm, Lesser Restoration, Protection from Evil and Good Dispel Magic, Protection from Energy 7 Freedom of Movement, Summon Construct 9 Greater Restoration, Wall of Force In addition, consult the Manifestations of Order table and choose or randomly determine a way your connection to order manifests while you are casting any of your Sorcerer spells. MANIFESTATIONS OF ORDER 1d6 Manifestation Spectral cogwheels hover behind you. The hands of a clock spin in your eyes. Your skin glows with a brassy sheen. Floating equations and geometric objects overlay your body. 5 Your Spellcasting Focus temporarily takes the form of a Tiny clockwork mechanism. 6 The ticking of gears or ringing of a clock can be heard by you and those affected by your magic. Rwn a LEVEL 3: RESTORE BALANCE Your connection to the plane of absolute order allows you to equalize chaotic moments. When a creature you can see within 60 feet of yourself is about to roll a d20 with Advantage or Dis- advantage, you can take a Reaction to prevent the roll from being affected by Advantage and Disadvantage, You can use this feature a number of times equal to your Charisma modifier (minimum of once), and you regain all expended uses when you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 6: BASTION OF LAW You can tap into the grand equation of existence to imbue a creature with a shimmering shield of order. Asa Magic action, you can expend 1 to S Sorcery Points to create a magical ward around yourself or another creature you can see within 30 feet of yourself. The ward is represented by a number of d8s equal to the number of Sorcery Points spent to create it. When the warded creature takes damage, it can expend a number of those dice, roll them, and reduce the damage taken by the total rolled on those dice. The ward lasts until you finish a Long Rest or un- til you use this feature again. LEVEL 14: TRANCE OF ORDER You gain the ability to align your consciousness with the endless calculations of Mechanus. As a Bonus Action, you can enter this state for 1 minute. For the duration, attack rolls against you can't ben- efit from Advantage, and whenever you make a D20 Test, you can treat a roll of 9 or lower on the d20 as a0. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you spend 5 Sor- cery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it. LEVEL 18: CLOCKWORK CAVALCADE You momentarily summon spirits of order to ex- punge disorder around you. As a Magic action, you summon the spirits in a 30-foot Cube originating from you. The spirits look like modrons or other Constructs of your choice. The spirits are intangible and invulnerable, and they create the effects below within the Cube before vanishing. Once you use this action, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you spend 7 Sorcery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it. Heal. The spirits restore up to 100 Hit Points, divided as you choose among any number of crea- tures of your choice in the Cube. Repair. Any damaged objects entirely in the Cube are repaired instantly. Dispel. Every spell of level 6 and lower ends on creatures and objects of your choice in the Cube. Crockwork Sorcery Susctass Draconic Sorcery Suscvass # Draconig Sorcery. Breathe the Magic of Dragons Your innate magic comes from the gift of a dragon. Perhaps an ancient dragon facing death bequeathed some of its magical power to you or your ancestor. You might have absorbed magic from a site infused with dragons' power. Or perhaps you handled a treasure taken from a dragon's hoard that was steeped in draconic power. Or you might have a dragon for an ancestor. LEVEL 3: DRACONIC RESILIENCE The magic in your body manifests physical traits of your draconic gift. Your Hit Point maximum increases by 3, and it increases by 1 whenever you gain another Sorcerer level. Parts of you are also covered by dragon-like scales. While you aren't wearing armor, your base Armor Class equals 10 plus your Dexterity and Cha- risma modifiers. LEVEL 3: DRACONIC SPELLS When you reach a Sorcerer level specified in the Draconic Spells table, you thereafter always have the listed spells prepared. Draconic SPELLS Sorcerer Level Spells 3 Alter Self, Chromatic Orb, Command, Dragon's Breath Fear, Fly Arcane Eye, Charm Monster 9 Legend Lore, Summon Dragon LEVEL 6: ELEMENTAL AFFINITY Your draconic magic has an affinity with a damage type associated with dragons. Choose one of those types: Acid, Cold, Fire, Lightning, or Poison. You have Resistance to that damage type, and when you cast a spell that deals damage of that type, you can add your Charisma modifier to one damage roll of that spell. LEVEL 14: DRAGON WINGS Asa Bonus Action, you can cause draconic wings to appear on your back. The wings last for 1 hour or until you dismiss them (no action required). For the duration, you have a Fly Speed of 60 feet. Once you use this feature, you can't use it again until you finish a Long Rest unless you spend 3 Sor- cery Points (no action required) to restore your use of it. LEVEL 1s: DRAGON COMPANION You can cast Summon Dragon without a Material component. You can also cast it once without a spell slot, and you regain the ability to cast it in this way when you finish a Long Rest. Whenever you start casting the spell, you can modify it so that it doesn't require Concentration. If you do so, the spell's duration becomes 1 minute for that casting. WiLp MaGiIc SORCERY Unleash Chaotic Magic Your innate magic stems from the forces of chaos that underlie the order of creation. You or an ancestor might have endured exposure to raw magic, perhaps through a planar portal leading to Limbo or the Elemental Planes. Perhaps you were blessed by a fey being or marked by a de- mon. Or your magic could be a fluke with no apparent cause. Whatever its source, this magic churns within you, waiting for any outlet. LEVEL 3: WILD MAGIC SURGE Your spellcasting can unleash surges of untamed magic. Once per turn, you can roll 1d20 immedi- ately after you cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot. If you roll a 20, roll on the Wild Magic Surge table to create a magical effect. If the magical effect is a spell, it is too wild to be affected by your Metamagic. LEVEL 3: TIDES OF CHAOS You can manipulate chaos itself to give yourself Advantage on one D20 Test before you roll the \_«. d20. Once you do so, you must cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot or finish a Long Rest be- fore you can use this feature again. If you do cast a Sorcerer spell with a spell slot before you finish a Long Rest, you auto- matically roll on the Wild Magic Surge table. LEVEL 6: BEND Luck You have the ability to twist fate using your wild magic. Immediately after another creature you can see rolls the d20 for a D20 Test, you can take a Reaction and spend 1 Sorcery Point to roll 1d4 and apply the number rolled as a bonus or penalty (your choice) to the d20 roll. LEVEL 14: CONTROLLED CHAOS You gain a modicum of control over the surges of your wild magic. Whenever you roll on the Wild Magic Surge table, you can roll twice and use ei- ther number. Wito Macic Sorcery Suacvass # TAQ LEVEL 18: TAMED SURGE Immediately after you cast a Sorcerer spell witha spell slot, you can create an effect of your choice from the Wild Magic Surge table instead of rolling on that table. You can choose any effect in the table except for the final row, and if the chosen effect in- volves a roll, you must make it. i Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. Witp Macic SurGeE 1d100 Effect 01-04 Roll on this table at the start of each of your turns for the next minute, ignoring this re- sult on subsequent rolls. 05-08 A creature that is Friendly toward you ap- pears in a random unoccupied space within 60 feet of you. The creature is under the DM's control and disappears 1 minute later. Roll 1d4 to determine the creature: on a 1, a Modron Duodrone appears; on a 2, a Flumph appears; on a 3, a Modron Mono- drone appears; on a 4, a Unicorn appears. See the Monster Manual for the creature's stat block. 09-12 For the next minute, you regain 5 Hit Points at the start of each of your turns. 13-16 Creatures have Disadvantage on saving throws against the next spell you cast in the next minute that involves a saving throw. 17-20 You are subjected to an effect that lasts for 1 minute unless its description says other- wise. Roll 1d8 to determine the effect: on a 1, you're surrounded by faint, ethereal music only you and creatures within 5 feet of you can hear; on a 2, your size increases by one Py size category; on a 3, you grow a long beard made of feathers that remains until you sneeze, at which point the feathers explode from your face and vanish; on a 4, you must shout when you speak; ona 5, illusory but- terflies flutter in the air within 10 feet of you; on a 6, an eye appears on your forehead, granting you Advantage on Wisdom (Perception) checks; on an 7, pink bubbles float. out of your mouth whenever you speak; on > \] an 8, your skin turns a vibrant shade of blue for 24 hours or until > the effect is ended by a Remove Curse spell. 21-24 For the next minute, all your spells with a casting time of an action have a casting time of a Bonus Action. } \> \_---s CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES 1d100 25-28 29-32 33-36 37-40 41-44 45-48 49-52 # 53-56 57-60 61-64 Effect You are transported to the Astral Plane until the end of your next turn. You then return to the space you previously occupied or the nearest unoccupied space if that space is occupied. The next time you cast a spell that deals damage within the next minute, don't roll the spell's damage dice for the damage. In- stead use the highest number possible for each damage die. You have Resistance to all damage for the next minute. You turn into a potted plant until the start of your next turn. While you're a plant, you have the Incapacitated condition and have Vulnerability to all damage. If you drop to 0 Hit Points, your pot breaks, and your form reverts. For the next minute, you can teleport up to 20 feet as a Bonus Action on each of your turns. You and up to three creatures you choose within 30 feet of you have the Invisible con- dition for 1 minute. This invisibility ends on a creature immediately after it makes an at- tack roll, deals damage, or casts a spell. A spectral shield hovers near you for the next minute, granting you a +2 bonus to AC and immunity to Magic Missile. You can take one extra action on this turn. You cast a random spell. If the spell nor- mally requires Concentration, it doesn't require Concentration in this case; the spell lasts for its full duration. Roll 1d10 to determine the spell: on a 1, Confusion; on a 2, Fireball; on a 3, Fog Cloud; ona 4, Fly (cast on a random creature within 60 feet of you), ona 5, Grease; on a 6, Levitate (cast on yourself); on a 7, Magic Missile (cast as a level 5 spell); on an 8, Mirror Image; on a9, Polymorph (cast on yourself), and if you fail the saving throw, you turn into a Goat (see appendix B); on a 10, See Invisibility. For the next minute, any flammable, non- magical object you touch that isn't being worn or carried by another creature bursts into flame, takes 1d4 Fire damage, and is burning. ct ou die within the next hour, you immedi- ately revive as if by the Reincarnate spell. You have the Frightened condition until the end of your next turn. The DM determines the source of your fear. You teleport up to 60 feet to an unoccupied space you can see. A random creature within 60 feet of you has the Poisoned condition for 1d4 hours. You radiate Bright Light in a 30-foot radius for the next minute. Any creature that ends its turn within 5 feet of you has the Blinded condition until the end of its next turn. Up to three creatures of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you take 1d10 Ne- crotic damage. You regain Hit Points equal to the sum of the Necrotic damage dealt. x = Effect Up to three creatures of your choice that you can see within 30 feet of you take 4410 Lightning damage. You and all creatures within 30 feet of you have Vulnerability to Piercing damage for the next minute. Roll 1d6: On a 1, you regain 2d10 Hit Points; on a 2, one ally of your choice within 300 feet of you regains 2d10 Hit Points; on a 3, you regain your lowest-level expended spell slot; on a 4, one ally of your choice within 300 feet of you regains their lowest-level ex- pended spell slot; on a 5, you regain all your expended Sorcery Points; on a 6, all the ef- fects of row 17-20 affect you simultaneously. THe SOR@ERER DELINA MAN IBUUREER AVILO MAGIC TO CREATEMNPREDICTABLE # Wonders Nestor Ossandone Leal Core WaRLOCK TRAITS \| Primary Ability Hit Point Die Saving Throw Proficiencies | Skill Proficiencies Charisma D8 per Warlock level Wisdom and Charisma Choose 2: Arcana, Deception, History, Intimidation, Investi- \| gation, Nature, or Religion Weapon Proficiencies Simple weapons Armor Training Light armor Choose A or B: (A) Leather Armor, Sickle, 2 Daggers, \| Arcane Focus (orb), Book \| (occult lore), Scholar's Pack, Starting Equipment | and 15 GP; or (B) 100 GP \| ARLOCKS QUEST FOR KNOWLEDGE W that lies hidden in the fabric of the mul- tiverse. They often begin their search for magical power by delving into tomes of forbidden lore, dabbling in invocations meant to attract the power of extraplanar beings, or seeking places of power where the influence of these beings can be felt. In no time, each Warlock is drawn into a bind- ing pact with a powerful patron. Drawing on the ancient knowledge of beings such as angels, archfey, demons, devils, hags, and alien entities of the Far Realm, Warlocks piece together Arcane secrets to bolster their own power. Warlocks view their patrons as resources, as means to the end of achieving magical power. Some Warlocks respect, revere, or even love their patrons; some serve their patrons grudgingly; and some seek to undermine their patrons even as they wield the power their patrons have given them. Once a pact is made, a Warlock's thirst for knowl- edge and power can't be slaked with mere study. Most Warlocks spend their days pursuing greater power and deeper knowledge, which typically means some kind of adventure. # Becoming A Warlock... 33 As A LEVEL 1 CHARACTER - Gain all the traits in the Core Warlock Traits table. - Gain the Warlock's level 1 features, which are listed in the Warlock Features table. | As A MULTICLASS CHARACTER - Gain the following traits from the Core Warlock Traits table: Hit Point Die and training with Light armor. - Gain the Warlock's level 1 features, which are listed in the Warlock Features table. See the mul- ticlassing rules in chapter 2 to determine your available spell slots. WARLOCK CLAss FEATURES As a Warlock, you gain the following class features when you reach the specified Warlock levels. These features are listed in the Warlock Features table. LeveL 1: ELDRITCH INVOCATIONS You have unearthed Eldritch Invocations, pieces of forbidden knowledge that imbue you with an abid- ing magical ability or other lessons. You gain one invocation of your choice, such as Pact of the Tome. Invocations are described in the "Eldritch Invoca- tion Options" section later in this class's description. Prerequisites. If an invocation has a prerequisite, you must meet it to learn that invocation. For ex- ample, if an invocation requires you to be a level 5+ Warlock, you can select the invocation once you reach Warlock level 5. Replacing and Gaining Invocations. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one of your invocations with another one for which you qualify. You can't replace an invocation if it's a prerequisite for another invocation that you have. When you gain certain Warlock levels, you gain more invocations of your choice, as shown in the Invocations column of the Warlock Features table. You can't pick the same invocation more than once unless its description says otherwise. LEvEL 1: Pact Macic Through occult ceremony, you have formed a pact with a mysterious entity to gain magical powers. The entity is a voice in the shadows---its identity unclear---but its boon to you is concrete: the ability to cast spells. See chapter 7 for the rules on spell- casting. The information below details how you use those rules with Warlock spells, which appear in the Warlock spell list later in the class's description. Cantrips. You know two Warlock cantrips of your choice. Eldritch Blast and Prestidigitation are recom- mended. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one of your cantrips from this feature with another Warlock cantrip of your choice. When you reach Warlock levels 4 and 10, you learn another Warlock cantrip of your choice, as shown in the Cantrips column of the Warlock Fea- tures table. # CHAPTER \| CHARACTER CLASSES f # 153 Warlock Features Proficiency Bonus \_Class Features Level 1 +2 Eldritch Invocations, Pact Magic 2 +2 Magical Cunning 3 +2 Warlock Subclass 4 +2 Ability Score Improvement 5 +3 = 6 43 Subclass feature if +3 ---\_ 8 +3 Ability Score Improvement 9 +4 Contact Patron 10 +4 Subclass feature nN +4 Mystic Arcanum (level 6 spell) 12 +4 Ability Score Improvement 13 +5 Mystic Arcanum (level 7 spell) 14 +5 Subclass feature 15 +5 Mystic Arcanum (level 8 spell) 16 +5 Ability Score Improvement 7 +6 Mystic Arcanum (level 9 spell) 18 +6 --- 19 +6 Epic Boon 20 +6 Eldritch Master Spell Slots. The Warlock Features table shows how many spell slots you have to cast your Warlock spells of levels 1-5. The table also shows the level of those slots, all of which are the same level. You regain all expended Pact Magic spell slots when you finish a Short or Long Rest. For example, when you're a level 5 Warlock, you have two level 3 spell slots. To cast the level 1 spell Witch Bolt, you must spend one of those slots, and you cast it as a level 3 spell. Prepared Spells of Level 1+. You prepare the list of level 1+ spells that are available for you to cast with this feature. To start, choose two level 1 Warlock spells. Charm Person and Hex are recommended. The number of spells on your list increases as you gain Warlock levels, as shown in the Prepared Spells column of the Warlock Features table. Whenever that number increases, choose additional War- lock spells until the number of spells on your list matches the number in the table. The chosen spells must be of a level no higher than what's shown in the table's Slot Level column for your level. When you reach level 6, for example, you learn a new War- lock spell, which can be of levels 1-3. If another Warlock feature gives you spells that you always have prepared, those spells don't count against the number of spells you can prepare with CHAPTER3 \| CHARACTER CLASSES OSD EE FE are IO Eldritch Prepared Spell Slot Invocations Cantrips Spells Slots Level # 1 2 2 1 1 # 3 2 3 2 1 3 2 4 2 2 3 5: 5 2 2 5 3 6 2 3 5 3 7 2 3 6 3 8 2 4 6 3 9 2 4 7 3 10 2 5 7 4 10 2 5 7 4 an 3 5 8 4 n 3 5 8 4 12 3 5 8 4 12 3 5 9 4 13 3 5 9 4 13 # 3 5 9 4 14 4 5 10 4 14 4 5 10 4 15 4 5 10 4 15 4 5 this feature, but those spells otherwise count as Warlock spells for you. Changing Your Prepared Spells. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can replace one spell on your list with another Warlock spell of an eligible level. Spellcasting Ability. Charisma is the spellcasting ability for your Warlock spells. Spellcasting Focus. You can use an Arcane Focus as a Spellcasting Focus for your Warlock spells. LEVEL 2: MAGICAL CUNNING You can perform an esoteric rite for 1 minute. At the end of it, you regain expended Pact Magic spell slots but no more than a number equal to half your max- imum (round up). Once you use this feature, you can't do so again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL 3: WARLOCK SUBCLASS You gain a Warlock subclass of your choice. The Archfey Patron, Celestial Patron, Fiend Patron, and Great Old One Patron subclasses are detailed after this class's description. A subclass is a specialization that grants you features at certain Warlock levels. For the rest of your career, you gain each of your subclass's features that are of your Warlock level or lower. LevEL i). ABILITY SCORE IMPROVEMENT You gain the Ability Score Improvement feat (see chapter 5) or another feat of your choice for which you qualify. You gain this feature again at Warlock levels 8, 12, and 16. LEVEL 9: CONTACT PATRON In the past, you usually contacted your patron through intermediaries. Now you can communicate directly; you always have the Contact Other Plane spell prepared. With this feature, you can cast the spell without expending a spell slot to contact your patron, and you automatically succeed on the spell's saving throw. Once you cast the spell with this feature, you can't do so in this way again until you finish a Long Rest. LEVEL ll: MysTIC ARCANUM Your patron grants you a magical secret called an arcanum. Choose one level 6 Warlock spell as this arcanum. You can cast your arcanum spell once without ex- pending a spell slot, and you must finish a Long Rest before you can cast it in this way again. As shown in the Warlock Features table, you gain another Warlock spell of your choice that can be cast in this way when you reach Warlock levels 13 (level 7 spell), 15 (level 8 spell), and 17 (level 9 spell). You regain all uses of your Mystic Arcanum when you finish a Long Rest. Whenever you gain a Warlock level, you can re- place one of your arcanum spells with another War- lock spell of the same level. LEvEL 19: Epic BOON You gain an Epic Boon feat (see chapter 5) or an- other feat of your choice for which you qualify. Boon of Fate is recommended. LEVEL 20: ELDRITCH MASTER When you use your Magical Cunning feature, you regain all your expended Pact Magic spell slots.